Paper Code: ETCS-427
Paper: Parallel Computing


UNIT I
Theory of Parallelism:
  Parallelism, Reason of parallel processing, Concepts and challenges, applications of parallel processing.
Parallel computer models:
  The state of computing, Classification of parallel computers, Flynn & Feng’s classification, SIMD and MIMD operations, Shared Memory vs. message passing multiprocessors, Distributed shared memory, Hybrid multiprocessors, multiprocessors and multicomputers, Multivector and SIMD computers, PRAM and VLSI Models.
Program and Network Properties:
  Conditions of parallelism, program partitioning and scheduling, program flow mechanism, system interconnection architecture.
[T1, T2]

UNIT II
Memory Hierarchy Design:
  Memory technologies and optimization, inclusion, coherence and locality, cache memory organization and cache performance optimization, shared memory organization, memory protection, virtual memory technology and introduction to buses, crossbar and multi-stage switches.
Pipelining and ILP:
  Instruction level parallelism and its exploitation- concepts and challenges, overcoming data hazards with dynamic scheduling. Pipelining, instruction and arithmetic pipelining designs, branch handling techniques, linear and non-linear pipeline processors, superscalar and super pipeline design.
[T1, T2]

UNIT III
Parallel architectures:
  Multi-processor system interconnects, cache coherence and synchronization mechanism, message passing mechanism, vector processing principles, multivector multiprocessors, compound vector processing, principles of multithreading, latency hiding techniques- shared virtual memory, prefetching techniques, distributed coherent cache, scalable and multithread architectures, dataflow and hybrid architecture.
[T1, T2]

UNIT IV
Parallel Programming Platforms:
  Implicit Parallelism: Trends in Microprocessor Architectures, limitations of Memory System Performance, Dichotomy of Parallel Computing Platforms, Physical Organization of Parallel Platforms, Communication Costs in Parallel Machines, Routing Mechanisms for Interconnection Networks.
Parallel Programming Models:
  Shared variable models, message passing models, parallel languages and complier, code optimization and scheduling, Introduction of shared-memory MIMD machines and message-passing MIMD machines.
[T1, T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Introduction to Parallel Computing
      Ananth Grama, Anshul Gupta, George Karypis, Vipin Kumar
       Pearson Publication
[T2] Advance computer Architecture
      Kai Hwang
       Tata McGraw Hill publications.
[T3] Introduction to Parallel Processing: Algorithms & Architectures
      Behrooz Parhami
       Springer Shop

Reference Books:
[R1] Introduction to Parallel Processing
      P. Ravi Prakash, M. Sasikumar, Dinesh Shikhare
       PHI Publications
[R2] Fundamentals of Parallel Processing
      Jordan Harry, Alaghband Gita
       PHI Publication
[R3] Introduction to Parallel Programming
      Steven Brawer
[R4] Parallel Computers – Architecture and Programming
      V. Rajaraman And C. Siva Ram Murthy