Paper Code: ETME-209
Paper: Electrical Machines


UNIT – I
D.C. Machines:
  Constructional features, Principles of operation, EMF equation Voltage build up phenomenon in a D.C. shunt generator, characteristics of different types of generators.
  Principle of operation of DC motor, back emf, speed and torque equation, various characteristics of different motors, starters and speed control of DC motors, applications of DC generators and motors.
[T1, T2]

UNIT – II
A.C. Machines:
  Constructional features, concept of revolving magnetic field, and principle of operation of Three phase induction motors, torque slip characteristics and power flow in induction motors, induction motor as a transformer, equivalent circuit, performance calculations, starting and speed control.
[T1, T2]

UNIT – III
Three Phase synchronous Machine:
  Constructional features EMF equation.
  Armature reaction of synchronous generator, voltage regulation of generators, phasor diagrams and equivalent circuits of synchronous machine, computation of synchronous machine performance.
  Starting methods and principle of operation of synchronous motors, synchronous condenser.
[T1, T2]

UNIT – IV
Single phase induction motors:
  double revolving field theory, different types of single phase induction motors, characteristics and typical applications.
  Stepper motors, hysteresis motor, Servo motors, AC series motor and Universal motor and their applications to mechanical systems.
[T1, T2]

Text Books:
[T1] Electric Machinery, 6th edition
      A. Fitzgerald, Charles Kingsley, Stephen Umans
       Tata McGraw Hill Education, 2002
[T2] Electrical Machines
      D.P. Kothari, I.J. Nagrath
       Tata McGraw Hill Education, 2014

Reference Books:
[R1] Electrical and Electronic Technology, 10th edition
      Hughes Edward, Ian Mckenzie Smith, JohnHiley
       Pearson Eduction, 2010
[R2] Electrical Engineering Fundamentals, 2nd edition
      Vincent Del Toro
       Prentice-Hall, 1989
[R3] Introduction to Electrical Engineering
      Mulukutla S. Sarma
       Oxford University Press Inc., 2001
[R4] Problems in Electrical Engineering: Power engineering and electronics with answers Partly Solved in S.I. Units, 9th edition
      Parker Smith
       CBS Publishers, 2003
[R5] Basic Electrical Engineering
      C.L. Wadhwa
       New Age International, 2007