Paper Code: ETTE-404 L T/P C
Paper: Modern Manufacturing Methods 3 1 4
Objective: The objective of the paper is to facilitate the student with the basics of Non-Conventional or Modern
Manufacturing Methods and it’sapplication in different type of Industries.
UNIT I
Introduction: An overview of Modern Manufacturing Methods (MMM) - Classification, their comparative
study, Need of MMM.
Process selection: Physical Parameters, Shape applications, Material applications, Process capability, Effects
on equipments and Tooling, Process economy.
[T1, T2] [No. of Hrs: 10]
UNIT II
Ultrasonic Machining: Construction and working Principle, Elements of Process, Effect of process parameters,
applications and limitations.
Abrasive Jet Machining: Working Principle, equipment used, Variables in AJM, Advantages, Disadvantages,
Applications.
Water Jet Machining: Working Principle, equipment used, process parameter, Advantages, Disadvantages,
Application.
Abrasive Flow Machining: Working Principle, equipment used, process parameter, Advantages,
Disadvantages, Application.
Chemical Machining: Working Principle, equipment used, process parameter, Advantages, Disadvantages,
Application.
[T1, T2][No. of Hrs: 11]
UNIT III
Electro Chemical Machining (ECM): Principle, Elements of ECM process, Electrochemistry of ECM,
selection of electrolytes and analysis of ECM, Advantages, Limitations, Applications.
Electro Chemical Grinding (ECG): Process: Working principle, equipment used, Process parameters,
Advantages, Disadvantages and Application.
Electro Chemical Honing (ECH): Process: Working principle, equipment used, Process parameters,
Advantages, Disadvantages and Application.
[T1, T2][No. of Hrs: 11]
UNIT IV
Laser Beam Machining: Working principle, equipments, Process parameters, Advantages, Disadvantages and
Application.
Plasma Arc Machining: Working Principle, Parameters, Safety precautions, Applications.
Electron Beam Machining: Principle, beam control techniques, Process capabilities, Comparison of thermal
and non-thermal processes, Advantages and limitations.
Electric Discharge Machining: Working Principle, Mechanism of metal removal, Basic EDM circuits,
selection of tool material and dielectrics, Flushing, Advantages, Disadvantages and Applications.
Wire Cut EDM: Working principle, process parameter, equipments, characteristics of machining process,
applications, Ion Beam Machining (IBM): Working principle, equipment used, Process parameters, Advantages,
Disadvantages and Application.
[T1, T2][No. of Hrs: 12]

Text Books:
[T1] P.C. Pandey & H.S. Shan, “Modern Machining Process”, Tata McGraw Hills, 2006.
[T2] Amitabh Gosh and A.K. Mallik, “Manufacturing Science”, Affiliated East-West Press Pvt. Ltd., 1985.

Reference Books:
[R1] Vijay K Jain, “Advance Machining Processes”, Allied Publishers Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2002.
[R2] P K Mishra, “Nonconventional Machining”, Narosa Publication, 1997.
[R3] McGeough, “Advanced Methods of Machining”, Chapman and Hall, London, 1998.