Paper Code: ETTE-424 L T/P C
Paper: Supply Chain Management - Planning 3 0 3


UNIT-I
Supply Chain Management -
  Concepts, Issues in Supply Chain Management.
  Demand Volatility and information distortion, Managing networks and relationships.
  Sourcing Internationally, Subcontracting within an International Dimension, The Architecture of Physical distribution network: Distribution Management: Types of Intermediaries, Channel Objectives and Constraints, Channel Selection and Management, Global Retailing, International Channel Innovation.
[T1, T2]

UNIT-II
Logistics Framework –
  Concept, Objective and Scope.
  Transportation, Warehousing, Inventory Management.
  Packing and Unitization.
  Control and Communication, Role of Information Technology in Logistics, Logistics Service Firms and Third Party Logistics.
[T1, T2]

UNIT-III
Logistics Network Design for Domestic/Global Operations:
  Logistics Network Configuration, Orienting International Facilities: Considerations and Framework, Trade-offs Associated with each Approach, Mapping the different Approaches, Capacity Expansion Issues.
Information Management for Global Logistics:
  The Global LIS/LITS: Capabilities and Limitations, Characteristics of Logistics Information and Telecommunications Systems.
[T1, T2]

UNIT-IV
Performance Measurement and Evaluation in Global Logistics:
  Operations and Logistics Control: Key Activities Performance Information, Measuring Performance in Functional Integration, Measuring Performance in Sectoral Integration; Measurements and improvements of SCM service quality and performance; Past, present and future of Supply Chain Management.
[T1, T2]


Text Books
[T1] Christopher Martin
      Logistics & Supply Chain Management Creating Value-adding Networks, 3rd Edition
       Pearson Education (2005)
[T2] S.K. Bhattacharyya
      Logistics Management, Definition, Dimensions and Functional Applications
       S. Chand and Company, Delhi (2010)

Reference Books:
[R1] Chopra Sunil and Peter Meindl
      Supply Chain Management, 4th Edition
       Pearson Education (2009)
[R2] Ballou, R. H.
      Business Logistic Management, 5th Edition
       Prentice Hall, New Delhi (2004)
[R3] Bowersox, D. J., David, J & Cooper
      Supply Chain Logistics Management
       McGraw Hill (2002)