Paper Code: ETIC-309 L T/P C
Paper: Object Oriented Programming using JAVA 3 0 3


UNIT I
Java fundamentals:
  Features of Java, OOPs concepts, Java virtual machine, Reflection byte codes, Byte code interpretation, Data types, variable, arrays, expressions, operators, and control structures.
Introducing java classes:
  Abstract classes, Static classes, Inner classes, Packages, Wrapper classes, Interfaces, This, Super, Access control objects and methods: defining a class, adding variables and methods, creating objects, constructors, class inheritance.
Arrays and String:
  Creating an array, one and two dimensional arrays, string array and methods, Classes: String and String Buffer classes.
[T1, T2, T3]

UNIT II
Exception handling:
  Exception as objects, Exception hierarchy, uncaught exceptions, built in exception, creating your own exceptions, Try, final, Throw, throws.
IO package:
  Input streams, Output streams, Object serialization, Deserialization, Sample programs on IO files, Filter and pipe streams
Multi threading:
  Thread Life cycle, Multi threading advantages and issues, Simple thread program, Java thread model: priorities, synchronization, messaging, thread classes, Run able interface, and inter thread Communication, suspending, resuming and stopping threads.
[T1,T2,T3]

UNIT III
GUI:
  Introduction to AWT programming, Layout and component managers and menus, handling Image, animation, sound and video.
Event handling:
  Different Mechanism, the Delegation Event Model, Event Classes, Event Listener Interfaces.
Applet class:
  Applet life-cycle, passing parameters embedding in HTML, Swing components – JApplet, JButton, JFrame, etc, Sample swing programs, servlets.
[T1,T2,T3]

UNIT IV
Networking:
  Basics, networking classes and interfaces, using java.net package, doing TCP/IP and Data-gram Programming.
Database Connectivity:
  JDBC architecture, connectivity and working with connection interface, Working with statements, Creating and executing SQL statements, working with Result Set.
[T1,T2,T3]


Text Books:
[T1] Patrick Naughton and Herbertz Schildt
      “Java-2 The Complete Reference”
       TMH, 1999
[T2] Rick Dranell
      “HTML 4 unleashed”
       Techmedia Publication, 2004
[T3] Shelley Powers
      “Dynamic Web Publishing”, 2nd Ed
       Techmedia, 1998

Reference Books:
[R1] E. Balaguruswamy, “Programming with Java: A Primer”, TMH, 1998.
[R2] Horstmann, “Computing Concepts with Java 2 Essentials”, John Wiley, 2004.
[R3] Decker & Hirshfield, “Programming Java: A introduction to programming using JAVA”, Vikas Publication, 2000.
[R4] Tmy Gaddies, “Starting out with Java”, Wiley Dreamtech, 2005.
[R5] Holzner, “HTML Blackbook”, Wiley Dreamtech, 2005.