Paper Code: ETEL-305 L T/P C
Paper: Signals and Systems 3 1 4
Objective: This is the first course for representation of various types of electronic signals and LTI systems.
Applications of Fourier series, understanding of Fourier transforms and sampling of various signals. Analysis of
various systems using the Z transforms, Laplace transforms.
UNIT- I
Continuous And Discrete Time Signals: Definition of signal, Classification of Signals: Periodic and Aperiodic,
Even and Odd, Energy and Power signals, Deterministic and Random signals.
Singular Functions: Unit impulse, unit step, unit ramp, complex and exponential, parabolic, Signum, Sinc etc.
Properties of unit impulse in continuous and discrete domain, properties of basic functions w.r.t. orthogonality.
Transformation in independent variable of signals: Time scaling, Time shifting, Amplitude scaling.
Representation of signals in terms of singular function and orthogonal functions.
Systems: Definition of system, types of systems: Linear and nonlinear, static and dynamic, causal and noncausal,
time variant and invariant, invertible and non-invertible, stable and non-stable. System described by
differential equation and difference equation.
LTI System: Properties of LTI System, impulse response, convolution and its properties in continuous and
discrete domain with proof. Linear convolution in continuous and discrete domain using graphical method, using
general formula and matrix method.
[T1, T2] [No. of Hrs. 12]
UNIT- II
Fourier series: Need and application of Fourier series. Fourier series representation of continuous time and
discrete time signals using exponential method and trigonometric method. Magnitude and Phase spectrum of
signals.
Fourier Transform: Properties of the Continuous time and discrete time Fourier Transform. Magnitude and
Phase representations of frequency response of LTI systems Analysis and characterization of LTI systems using
Differential Equations and Difference equation. [T1,T2][No. of Hrs.
11]
UNIT- III
Magnitude- Phase Representation of Frequency Response of LTI System: Linear phase, concept of phase
delay and group delay. All pass system.
Laplace Transform: Properties of Laplace transform, concept of ROC and its properties. Computation of
impulse response & transfer function using Laplace transform. Inverse-Laplace transforms. Computation of
impulse response, total response (zero state and zero input response) & transfer function using Laplace
transform.
[T1, T2] [No. of Hrs. 11]
UNIT- IV
Sampling: Sampling of low pass signals, ideal sampling, Aliasing effect, Nyquist rate, reconstruction of signal.
Sampling of discrete time signals.
Z Transform: Region of convergence – properties of ROC, Properties of Z-transform.
Inverse Z-transform using contour integration - Residue theorem, Power series expansion and partial fraction
expansion. Relationship between Z-transform, Fourier transform and Laplace transform. Computation of impulse
response, total response (Zero state and Zero input response) & Transfer function using Z-Transform. Stability of
discrete-time LTI System.
[T1, T2] [No. of Hrs. 10]
Text Books:
[T1] AlanV.Oppenheim, Alan S.Willsky, S.Hamid Nawab, “Signals & Systems”, 2nd edition,
Pearson Education, 1997.
[T2] Simon Haykin and Barry Van Veen, “Signals and Systems”, John Wiley, 1999.
Reference Books:
[R1] M.J.Roberts, “Signals and Systems Analysis using Transform Method and MATLAB”, TMH 2003.
[R2] Tarun kumar rawat “signals and systems “, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2010
[R3] A. Anand kumar, “signals and systems” 3rd edition , PHI
[R4] Ramesh Babu and R.Anandanatrajan ,”Signals and system”, 4th edition Sci Tech ,2013
[R5] Moman .H. Hays, “Digital Signal Processing”, Schaum’s outlines, Tata McGraw-Hill2004.
[R6] John G.Proakis and Dimitris G.Manolakis, “Digital Signal Processing, Principles, Algorithms and
Applications”, 3rd edition. PHI, 2000.