Paper Code: ETIT-409
Paper: Distributed Databases


UNIT I
Architecture of distributed systems: network operating system, distributed operating systems, Distributed database systems.
(a) Federated database systems, (b) multi database systems, and (c) Client/Server systems, Distributed DBMS architecture.
Distributed database design: Top down design- Designing issues, Fragmentation, Allocation, Data dictionary, Bottom up design- Schema Matching, Schema Integration, Schema Mapping, Data Cleaning.
Data and Access Control: views in centralised and distributed DBMS, Data security, Semantic Integrity Control.
[T1,R1]

UNIT II
Query Processing: Characterization of query processors, Layers of query processing.
Query Decomposition: Normalization, Analysis, Elimination of redundancy,
Data Localization: Reduction of primary horizontal fragmentation, Reduction of vertical fragmentation, reduction of derived fragmentation, hybrid fragmentation.
Optimization of Distributed Query: Join ordering, Semi join based algorithms, optimization
[T1,T2]

UNIT III
Transaction Management: Properties of transactions, Types of transactions- flat transactions, nested transactions, workflow.
Distributed Concurrency Control: Serializability theory, Locking based concurrency control Algorithm, Timestamp based algorithms.
Deadlock Management: Prevention, Avoidance, Detection and Resolution
[T1,T2]

UNIT IV
Distributed DBMS Reliability: Local Reliability protocol, Distributed Reliability protocol-  2 phase commit protocol, 3 phase commit protocol.
Parallel Database System: System architecture, Parallel query processing, Load Balancing, Database Clusters.
Web Data Management: Web Search-crawling, indexing ranking, Web Querying, Distributed XML Processing.
[T1,R2]


Text Books:
[T1] Principles of Distributed Database Systems
     Ozsu and Valduriez
      Prentice Hall
[T2] Distributed Database Principles and Systems
     Ceri and Pelagatti
      McGraw Hill

Reference Books:
[R1] Distributed Systems: Concept and Design
     Coulouris, Dollimore, and Kindberg
      AW
[R2] Recovery Mechanisms in Database Systems
     Kumar and Hsu
      Prentice Hall
[R3] Concurrency Control and Recovery in Database Systems
     Bernstein, Hadzilacos and Goodman
      AW