Paper Code: ETEN-420 L T/P C
Paper: Bio and Chemical Technology Applications in Waste Management 3 1 4


UNIT I
Environmental Biotechnology:
  Principles and concepts, Degradation of highly concentrated toxic pollutants. Mechanisms of detoxification, Oxidation, Dehalogenation, Biotransformation of metals, Bio absorption of metals.
  Use of microscopy in environmental application.
Bio-fuel (Biodiesel and Ethanol):
  Preparation/ Production of bio-fuel, Advantages of bio-fuel, Evaluation of toxicity of bio-fuel.
[T1, T2]

UNIT II
Use of Biotechnology for Pest Control, Desulphurization of coal and oil, hazardous waste treatment, solid waste management and treatment of Wastewater.
Bioremediation:
  In situ and ex situ techniques, Biosparging, Bioventing, Injection recovery, Land farming, Soil banking and soil slurry reactor techniques, Planning and management of bioremediation and environmental biotechnology processes.
[T1, T2]

UNIT III
Phytotechnology:
  Plants as bioreactors, Phyto-remediation, Phyto-extraction, Rhizo-filtration, Phytostabilisation, Phyto-degradation and phyto-volatilisation, Phyto-mining, Macrophyte based waste- water treatment systems, Algal effluent treatment systems and their limitations.
[T1, T2]

UNIT IV
Biosensors in detection of Environmental Pollutants:
  BOD sensor, Methane sensor, Ammonia and nitrate sensor, modeling of Bioreactors.
  Bio-depollution of soils contaminated by radio elements.
  Environmental impacts of pollutants and analysis of dose-effect relationship.
  Environmental effects and ethics in microbial technology, Genetically engineered organisms, Microbial containment, Risk assessment.
[T1, T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Mohapatra P.K.
      “Textbook of Environmental Biotechnology”
       I.K. International Publishing House (P) Ltd, New Delhi
[T2] Thakur I.S.
      “Environment Biotechnology basic concepts and applications”
       I.K. International Publishing House (P) Ltd, New Delhi

Reference Books:
[R1] Wang L.K., Ivanov V., Tay J., Hung Y.
      “Environmental Biotechnology”
       Humana Press
[R2] Martin .A.M.
      “Biological degradation of wastes”
       Elsevier Applied Science, London
[R3] Aggarwal S.K.
      “Advanced Environmental Biotechnology”
       APH Publishing, New Delhi
[R4] Jee C., Shagufta
      “Environmental Biotechnology”
       APH Publishing, New Delhi