Paper Code: ETEN-416 L T/P C
Paper: Climate Change Assessment and Mitigation Measures 3 1 4
Objective: After successful completion of this course students are expected to be able to:
1. Demonstrate an understanding of how the threats and opportunities of predicted climate change will
influence specific sectors at global and regional scale;
2. Critically evaluate the relative opportunities and needs for mitigation and adaptation (including
vulnerability assessments) in a variety of sectoral contexts;
3. Understand and critically evaluate the scientific insights underlying the assessment reports of the
IPCC, with a focus on impacts, adaptation and mitigation.
UNIT – I
Introduction: Resource management, Carrying Capacity, Green house gas emission- sources, control, trends,
projections, Carbon sequestration, Causes and impacts of Climate change, Negotiations of UNFCCC, Kyoto
Protocol, Montreal Protocol, Climate change conventions, Climate Policy Analysis- costs of inaction and costs
of action, Clean Air Act, Market based Policies- cap and trade mechanism.
[T1, T2][No. of Hours: 11]
UNIT – II
Climate Change Problem. International response to climate change- Emergence of Climate change regime,
Berlin Mandate, Post Kyoto era. Regime Participants-Parties, NGOs, International Organizations, UN bodies
and specialized agencies. Principles- Common Concern of Humankind, Principle 21 of Stockholm Conference
and Principle 2 of Rio Declaration, Common but Differentiated responsibilities, Precautionary Principle, Right
to sustainable Development.
[T1, T2][No. of Hours: 12]
UNIT – III
Mitigation Commitments- Annex I Parties, Kyoto quantified emission limitation or reduction commitments,
calculating assigned amount, use of Kyoto Flexibility Mechanisms.
CDM- Eligibility criteria for projects, project cycle, institutions and Procedures, monitoring and certification,
issuance of CERs.
Joint Implementation- Institutions, Participation/ eligibility, Track 1 and Track 2 Procedure, small scale and
nuclear projects.
[T1, T2][No. of Hours: 12]
UNIT – IV
IPCC- role, procedures, assessment process. Transport policies for climate change. Adaptation: National
programs and Adaptation measures, planning and integration, adaptation financing. Mitigation measures in
Developed and Developing countries.
[T1, T2][No. of Hours: 11]
Text Books:
[T1] Yamin F. and Deplegde J., “ The International Climate Change Regime- a Guide to Rules, Institutions
and Procedures”, Cambridge University Press, New York.
[T2] Luterbacher U. and Spriz D.F., “International Relations and Global Climate Change”, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, USA.
Reference Books:
[R1] Davoudi S., Crawford J., Mehmood A., “Planning for Climate Change”, Earthscan, London.
[R2] Mann M.E., Kump L.R., “Dire Predictions: Understanding Global Warming”, Dorling Kindersley
Publishing, London.
[R3] Posner E.A., Weisbach D., “Climate Change Justice”, Princeton University Press, New Jersey.