Paper Code: ETCE-414 L T/P C
Paper: Environmental Preventive Health Issues 3 1 4


UNIT – I
Ecology and Environmental Health, Exposure assessment, Sanitation, Industrial hygiene and environmental management, genetics and environmental health, Environmental Psychology, Environmental Health ethics, Environmental disasters, Legal remedies, Environmental health on the Global, regional and local Scale.
Toxicology.
[T1, T2]

UNIT – II
Impurities associated with surface and subsurface sources of water supply, Sanitary well, Water borne diseases: Viral, Bacterial, Protozoal and Helminthic, Preventive Measures.
Disinfection.
Maintenance of Drainage System from Health point of view.
Occupied Room Air:
  Effective Ventilation and Temperature, Prevention and Control.
  Disinfection of Air.
  Impact of waste management practices on health, Management of Landfill Sites.
[T1, T2]

UNIT – III
Health effects associated with lighting:
  Requirements of good Lighting, Lighting Standards, Biological Effects of Light.
Health effects associated with noise:
  Effects of Noise Exposure on Health, Noise Control.
Health effects associated with radiation:
  Exposure to Natural and Manmade Radiation, Types of Radiation, Biological effects of Radiation, Radiation Protection.
[T1, T2]

UNIT – IV
Occupational Health and Safety:
  Types of Occupational Hazards, Occupational Diseases such as Silicosis, Anthracosis, Byssinosis etc, Lead Poisoning, Occupational Cancers, Dermatitis, Occupational Hazards of Agricultural Workers, Health problems due to Industrialization, Measures for Health protection of workers, Prevention of Occupational Diseases.
[T1, T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Park J.E. and Park K.
      “Textbook of Preventive and Social Medicine”
       M/s. Banarsidas Bhanot Publishers, Jabalpur
[T2] Frumkin H.
      “Environmental Heath: from Global to Local”
       John Wiley and Sons, USA

Reference Books:
[R1] Selendy J.M.H.
      “Water and Sanitation Related Diseases and the Environment”
       John Wiley and Sons, USA
[R2] Tickner J.A.
      “Precaution, Environmental Science, and Preventive Public Policy”
       Island Press, Washington DC
[R3] Listorti J.A., Doumani F.M.
      “Environmental Health-bridging the gaps”
       The World Bank, Washington DC