Paper Code: ETEN-415 L T/P C
Paper: Advance Separation Process 3 1 4


UNIT I
Introduction: Review of conventional processes, Recent advances in separation techniques based on size,
surface properties, ionic properties and other special characteristics of substances, Process concept, Theory and
equipment used in cross flow filtration, cross flow electro filtration, dual functional filter, Surface based solid -
liquid separations involving a second liquid, Sirofloc filter.
[T1, T2]

UNIT II
Membrane Separation: Types and choice of membranes, Plate and frame, tubular, spiral wound and hollow
fiber membrane reactors and their relative merits, Commercial, pilot plant and laboratory membranes
permeators involving dialysis, reverse osmosis, Nanofiltration, Ultrafiltration, Microfiltration and Donnan
dialysis, Economics of membrane operations, Ceramic membranes.
[T1, T2]

UNIT III
Separation By Adsorption Techniques: Choice of adsorbents, Normal adsorption techniques, Types of
equipment and commercial processes, Recent advances and process economics, Gas Separation techniques for
recovery and reuse, Case Studies.
[T1, T2]

UNIT IV
Ionic Separations: Controlling factors, Applications, Types of equipment employed for electrophoresis, Dielectrophoresis,
Electro dialysis, Commercial Processes. Separations involving Iyophilisation, Prevaporation
and permeation techniques for solids, liquids and gases. Industrial viability and examples, Zone melting,
Adductive crystallization, other separation process, Supercritical fluid extraction.
[T1, T2]


Text Books:
[T1] King, C.J.
      "Separation Processes"
       Tata McGraw - Hill Publishing Co, Ltd, New Delhi
[T2] Ronald W. Roussel
      “Handbook of Separation Process Technology"
       John Wiley, New York

Reference Books :
[R1] Lacey, R.E. and Loaeb S.
      “Industrial Processing with Membranes"
       Wiley–Inter Science, New York
[R2] Schoew, H.M.
      "New Chemical Engineering Separation Techniques"
       Interscience Publishers
[R3] Kestory, R.E.
      "Synthetic Polymeric Membrances"
       Wiley, New York