Paper Code: ETEN-401 L T/P C
Paper: Biomedical, Hazardous and E-Waste Management 3 1 4


UNIT – I
Sources, Composition and characteristic of hazardous waste, Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling)
Rules, 1989 and amendments, Federal Hazardous Waste Regulations under RCRA, Superfund, CERCLA and
SARA. Toxicology, public health impact, Protocols, issues and challenges in transportation of hazardous waste.
[T1, T2]

UNIT – II
Characterization of medical waste- Bio-medical wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998,
Amendments and guidelines, segregation, packaging, storage, transport of infectious waste. Techniques of Biomedical
waste management. Health and safety rules. Protocols, issues and challenges in transportation of
Biomedical waste.
[T1, T2]

UNIT – III
Treatment method- Autoclave, Hydroclave, Microwave, Chemical Disinfection, Solidification and
stabilization, Bioremediation, Thermal Conversion Technologies, accumulation and storage of hazardous waste,
land disposal of hazardous waste, other treatment and disposal method. Common Hazardous Waste Treatment
facilities (TSDF).
[T1, T2]

UNIT – IV
E-waste: Introduction, toxicity due to hazardous substances in e-waste and their impacts, domestic e-waste
disposal, e-waste management, technologies for recovery of resource from electronic waste, guidelines for
environmentally sound management of e-waste, occupational and environmental health perspectives of
recycling e-waste in India.
[T1, T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Tchobanoglous G., Theisen H., Viquel S.A.
      “Integrated Solid Waste Management: Engineering, Principles and Management issues”
       Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd, New Delhi
[T2] CPHEEO Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management

Reference Books:
[R1] Peavy H.S., Rowe D.R., Tchobanoglous G.
      “Environmental Engineering”
       Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd, New Delhi
[R2] Cunningham W.P., Cunningham M.A., “Principles of Environmental Science”, Tata McGraw HillPublishing Company Ltd., New Delhi
[R3] Johri R., “E-waste: implications, regulations, and management in India and current global bestpractices”, TERI Press, New Delhi
[R4] Krishnamoorthy B., “Environmental Management, Text Book and Cases”, PHI Learning (P) Ltd., NewDelhi