Paper Code: ETEN-405 L T/P C
Paper: Application of Remote Sensing and GIS 3 0 3
Objective:
1. Understand the principles of remote sensing and digital image processing;
2. Understand the principles of Geographic Information Systems (GIS);
3. Gain experience in the applications of remote sensing and GIS for environmental engineering such as
assessment of cyclone, rainfall, atmospheric humidity etc.
4. Gain experience in the use of image processing and GIS software.
UNIT I
Introduction, concepts and physical basis of Remote Sensing, Electromagnetic spectrum, radiation laws,
atmospheric effects, image characteristics.
Remote sensing systems; sources of remote sensing information, spectral quantities spectral signatures and
characteristics spectral reflectance curves for rocks, soil, vegetation and water.
Introduction to Aerial and space borne platforms.
Global positioning system (GPS) photogrammetry – analog, analytical and digital photogrammetry, height and
plan metric.
[T1, T2][No. of Hours: 11]
UNIT II
Optical, thermal and microwave sensors and their resolution, salient features of some of operating Remote
Sensing satellites,
Digital image processing; introduction, image rectification and restoration, image enhancement, manipulation,
image classification, fusion.
[T1, T2][No. of Hours: 11]
UNIT III
GIS system : Definition terminology and data types, Map projection and Co-ordinate system, basic
components of GIS software, data models, data acquisition, both raster based and vector based data input and
data processing and management including topology, overlaying and integration and finally data product and
report generation, principle of cartography and cartographic design.
GIS customization concepts, approaches of Multi-criteria decision making, concepts and applications of
Geostatistics.
[T1, T2][No. of Hours: 11]
UNIT IV
Application of Geo-spatial technology in Environmental Management,, assessment of cyclones, rainfall,
atmospheric humidity etc., weather analysis, forecasting and modelling. Land use, inventory and monitoring,
forestry, urban planning, snow and glaciers, coastal zone management, pollution-land, air, and water,
sustainable development, climate change, commercially available remote sensing and GIS software.
[T1, T2][No. of Hours: 12]
Text Books:
[T1] Chang K.T.,”Introduction to Geographic Informayion System”, Tata McGraw Hill Education (P) Ltd.,
[T2] Joseph G., “Fundamentals of Remote Sensing”, University Press (India) Ltd., Hyderabad.
Reference Books:
[R1] Clarke K.C., Parks B.O., Crane M.P., “GIS and Environmental Modelimg”, PHI Learning (P) Ltd.,
[R2] Lillesand T.M. and Kiefer R.W, “Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation”, John Wiley and Sons,
NY
[R3] Lo C.P. and Yeung A.K.W., “Concept and Techniques of Geographic Information Systems”, PHI
Learning (P). Ltd., New Delhi.
[R4] Chakraborty D. and Sahoo R.N., “Fundamentals of Geographic Information System”, Viva Books