Paper Code: ETME-212
Paper: Fluid Mechanics


UNIT- I
Fundamental Concepts of Fluid Flow:
  Fundamental definitions, Fluid properties, classification of fluids, Flow characteristics, Foundations of flow analysis, Incompressible and compressible fluids, one, two and three dimensional flows.
Pressure and its measurements:
  Pascal’s law, pressure variation in a fluid at rest, Classification of different manometers.
Fluid Statics:
  Fluid pressure, Forces on solid surfaces, Buoyant forces, Metacentre and Metacentric height. Stability of floating bodies,
[T1, T2, R1, R2, R3]

UNIT- II
Kinematics of Fluid Flow:
  Types of fluid flow, streamline, path line and streak line; continuity equation, Equations for acceleration, Irrotational and rotational flow, velocity potential and stream function, Vortex flow, Continuity equation.
Dynamics of Fluid Flow:
  Control volume analysis, Eulers equation of motion, Bernoulli’s equation, Bernoulli’s theorems from steady flow energy equation, Venturi meter; Pitot tube, Momentum equation.
Laminar Flow:
  Reynold’s experiment, Critical velocity, Steady laminar flow through a circular tube, Measurement of viscosity.
[T1, T2, R1, R2, R3]

UNIT- III
Turbulent Flow:
  Shear stress in turbulent flow. Hydro dynamically smooth & rough boundaries.
  Velocity distribution for turbulent flow in smooth and rough pipes.
Boundary Layer Flow:
  Boundary Layer Theory and Applications: Boundary Layer thickness, displacement, momentum and energy thickness, Flow separation, Drag and lift on immersed bodies.
Pipe Flow Systems:
  Darcy-Weisbach equation, Moody diagram, Energy losses in pipelines, concept of equivalent length, Flow between 2 reservoirs multiple pipe systems.
  Siphon.
[T1, T2, R1, R2, R3]

UNIT- IV
Dimensional Analysis and Principles of Similarity: Buckingham’s Theorem and its applications, Geometric, Kinematics and Dynamic similarity; Dimensionless numbers-Reynolds, Froude, Euler, Mach, Weber Number and their significance.
Flow Measurements:
  Measurement of flow using, orifice meter, nozzle, Measurement of flow in open channels – rectangular, triangular, trapezoidal weir, Cipoeletti weir. Hot-wire anemometer.
[T1, T2, R1, R2, R3]


Text Books:
[T1] R.K. Basal
      “Fluid Mechanics & Hydraulic Machines”
       Laxmi Publications(P) Ltd.,2002.
[T2] D.S. Kumar
      “Fluid Mechanics and Fluid Power Engineering”
       S.K. Kataria & Sons,2000.

Reference Books:
[R1] I.H. Shames
      “Mechanics of Fluids”
       Tata McGraw Hill
[R2] V.L. Streeter and E.B. Wylie
      “Fluid Mechanics”
       Tata McGraw Hill
[R3] Modi, P.N., and Seth, S.H.
      “Hydrualics and Fluid Machines”
       Standard Book House,
[R4] Vijay Gupta and S.K. Gupta
      “Fluid Mechanics and its Applications”
       Wiley Eastern Ltd
[R5] Som, S.K. & Biswas G.
      Introduction of fluid mechanics & Fluid Machines
       TMH, 2000