Paper Code: ETME-206 L T/P C
Paper: Manufacturing Machines 3 1 4


UNIT - I
Introduction: Classification of machine tools based on application and production rate: General purpose and
Special purpose machines, Classification based on-types of machine tools and the processes, Generating and forming.
Elements of metal cutting processes: Elements of tool geometry, cutting tool materials and applications.
Lathe: Various types of lathe: Centre lathe, facing lathe, gap-bed lathe, capstan and turret lathe, NC, CNC and
DNC lathe, major difference between CNC lathe and conventional lathe. Major sub-assemblies of a lathe: Bed,
headstock, tail stock, carriage consisting of saddle, cross-slide, compound slide, tool post and apron. Work
holding devices: self centering three jaw chuck, independent four jaw chuck, collets, face plates, dog carriers,
centers and mandrels, Rest(Steady and Moving).
[T1,T2]

UNIT - II
Lathe Contd..: Driving mechanisms, apron mechanism, thread cutting mechanism and calculations, features of
half-nut engagement – disengagement, indexing dial mechanism. Operations on lathe: taper turning, related
calculations, thread cutting, facing, under-cutting, drilling, boring, parting-off, knurling, chamfering.
Reciprocating Type Machine Tools: Shaper, Planer and Slotter: Constructional features, basic machines and
kinematics and related calculations.
[T1]

UNIT III:
Drilling Machines: Constructional features of bench drilling machine, radial drilling machine, multi-spindle
drilling machine, feed mechanism, work holding devices, Tool – holding devices. Different drilling operations:
Drilling, reaming, counter boring and countersinking etc. estimation of drilling time.
Milling Machines: Types of general purpose milling machines: horizontal, vertical, universal and their principal
parts. Types of milling cutters and their applications, different milling operations, work-holding devices: vice,
clamps, chucks, dividing head and its use, simple, compound and differential indexing. Indexing calculations and
machining time calculations. Introduction to machining centers.
[T1,T2]

UNIT IV:
Grinding Machines: Different types of grinding machines: cylindrical, surface and centre-less grinding
machines, basic constructional features and mechanisms, specifications, different grinding operations, honing,
lapping and super-finishing processes.
Gear Manufacturing Machines: Gear forming, gear generation, gear shaping and gear hobbing.
[T1][No. of Hrs: 10]


Text Books:
[T1] B.S. Raghuwanshi, “Workshop Technology”, Vol.2, Dhanpat Rai & Sons, 2003.
[T2] S.F. Krar Stevan F. and Check A.F., “Technology of M/C Tools”, McGraw Hill Book Co., 1986
[T3] Hazra Chandhari S.K., “Elements of Workshop Technology”, Vol.2, Media Promoters, 2003.

Reference Books:
[R1] P.C. Sharma, “A Text Book of Production Engineering”, S. Chand, New Delhi, 2004.
[R2] Bawa H.S., “Workshop Technology”, Vol.2, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004.
[R3] Juneja & Shekhon, “Fundamental of Metal Cutting”, New Age Publications
[R4] Kibbe Richard et al, “M/c Tool practices”, Prentice Hall India, 2003.
[R5] Gerling Heinrich, “All about Machine Tools”, New Age Publication, 2003