Paper Code: ETIT-428
Paper: E-Commerce and M-Commerce


UNIT I
Introduction and Concepts:
  Networks and commercial transactions – Internet and other novelties; networks and electronic transactions today, Model for commercial transactions; Internet environment – internet advantage,WorldWideWeb and other internet sales venues; Online commerce solutions.
Security Technologies:
  Insecurity Internet, Introduction to Cryptography, Public key solution, Key distribution and certification, prominent cryptographic applications.
Electronic Payment Methods:
  Updating traditional transactions; secure online transaction models; Online commercial environments; digital currencies and payment systems; Offline secure processing; private data networks.
[T1,T2,R1,R4]

UNIT II
Protocols for Public Transport of Private Information:
  Security protocols; secure protocols; Secure hypertext transfer protocols; Secure sockets layers; Integrating security protocols into the web; Non technical provide.
E-Commerce Providers:
  Online Commerce options: Company profiles.
Electronic Payment Systems:
  Digital payment systems; First virtual internet payment system; cyber cash model.
Online Commerce Environments:
  Servers and commercial environments; Netscape product line; Netscape commerce server; Microsoft internet explorer and servers; open market.
Digital Currencies:
  Optional process of Digicash, E-cash Trail; Using E-cash; Smart cards, Electronic Data Interchange; Its basics; EDI versus Internet and EDI over Internet.
Strategies, Techniques and Tools:
  Internet Strategies: Internet Techniques, Shopping techniques and online selling techniques; Internet tools.
[T1,R5]

UNIT III
Supply chain management:
  Introduction, What is supply chain management? Focus on the value chain, Option for restructuring the supply chain, Using e-business to restructure the supply chain, Supply chain management implementation.
E-procurement:
  Introduction, What is e-procurement?, Drivers of e-procurement, Focus on estimating e-procurement cost savings, Risks and impacts of e-procurement, Implementing e-procurement, Focus on electronics B2B marketplaces, future of e-procurement.
Customer relationship management:
  Introduction, What is e-CRM?, conversion marketing, online buying process, customer acquisition management, focus on marketing communications for customer acquisition, customer retention management focus on excelling in e-commerce service quality, customer extension
Analysis and design:
  Introduction, process modeling, Data modeling, Design for e-business, Focus on user–centered site design, Focus on security design for e-business.
Implementation and maintenance:
  Introduction, Alternatives for acquiring e-business systems, Development of web-based content and services, focus on developing dynamic web content, testing, Changeover, Content management and maintenance, Focus on measuring and improving performance of e- business systems.
[T2,R2,R3]

UNIT IV
Introduction to M-commerce:
  Emerging applications, different players in m-commerce, M-commerce life cycle, Mobile financial services, mobile entertainment services, and proactive service management.
  Management of m-commerce services, Content development and distribution to hand-held devices, content caching, pricing of mobile commerce services.
Emerging issues in mobile commerce:
  The role of emerging wireless LANs and 3G/4G wireless networks, personalized content management, implementation challenges in m-commerce, futuristic m-commerce services.
[T2,R1,R4]


Text Books:
[T1] Ravi Kalakota, Andrew B. Whinston
      “Frontiers of E-Commerce”, 1st Edition
       Addison Wesley Longman, Sept. 1996
[T2] Dave Chaffey
      “E-Business and E-Commerce Management”, 3rd Edition
       Pearson Education, 2009

References Books:
[R1] Henry Chan, Raymod Lee and etl.
      “E-Commerce Fundamental and Applications”, 1st Edition
       Wiley, Nov. 2001
[R2] Brian Mennecke and Troy Strader
      “Mobile Commerce: Technology, Theory and Applications”
       IdeaGroup, 2003
[R3] Nansi Shi
      “Mobile Commerce Applications”
       IGI Global, 2004
[R4] Gary P. Schneider
      “Electronic Commerce”, Tenth Edition
       May 2012, CENGAGE Learning India
[R5] K.K. Bajaj, D. Nag
      “E-Commerce”, 2nd Edition
       McGraw Hill Education, Sept. 2005
[R6] P.T. Joseph,
      “E-Commerce an Indian Perspective”, 4th Edition
       July 2013, PHI Publication
[R7] Bhaskar Bharat
      “Electronic Commerce - Technology and Application”, 4th Edition
       McGraw Hill Education, May 2013