Paper Code: ETIT-432
Paper: Selected Topics of Recent Trends in IT


UNIT I - Data Warehousing:
Introduction to Data Warehousing:
  Evolution of Data Warehousing, Data Warehousing concepts, Benefits of Data Warehousing, Comparison of OLTP and Data Warehousing, Problems of Data Warehousing.
Data Warehousing Architecture:
  Operational Data and Data store, Load Manager, Warehouse Manager, Query Manager, Detailed Data, Lightly and Highly summarized Data, Archive/Backup Data, Meta-Data,architecture model, 2-tier, 3-tier and 4-tier data warehouse, end user Access tools.
[T1]

UNIT II - Data Warehousing Tools and Technology:
Tools and Technologies:
  Extraction, cleaning and Transformation tools, Data Warehouse DBMS, Data Warehouse Meta-Data, Administration and management tolls, operational vs. information systems.
  OLAP & DSS support in data warehouse.
Distributed Data Warehouse:
  Types of Distributed Data Warehouses, Nature of development Efforts, Distributed Data Warehouse Development, Building the Warehouse on multiple levels.
[R1,R2]

UNIT III - Types of Data Warehouses & Data Warehouse Design:
Host based, single stage, LAN based, Multistage, stationary distributed & virtual data warehouses.
Data warehousing Design:
  Designing Data warehouse Database, Database Design Methodology for Data Warehouses, Data Warehousing design Using Oracle, OLAP and data mining: Online Analytical processing, Data mining.
[T1,R1]

UNIT IV - Introduction to Big Data:
Big Data:
  Definitions, characteristics, Challenges of Conventional Systems, Web Data, Evolution Of Analytic Scalability, Analytic Processes and Tools - Analysis vs Reporting, Modern Data Analytic Tools
Statistical Concepts:
  Sampling Distributions, Re-Sampling, Statistical Inference, Prediction Error.
[T2,R3,R4]


Text Books
[T1] Paul Raj Poonia
      “Fundamentals of Data Warehousing”
       John Wiley & Sons, 2003
[T2] Adam Jorgensen, James Rowland-Jones, John Welch, Dan Clark, Christopher Prices, Brian Mitchell
      “Microsoft Big Data Solutions”
       Wiley India

Reference Books
[R1] W.H. Inmon
      “Building the operational data store”, 2nd Ed
       John Wiley, 1999
[R2] Kamber and Han
      “Data Mining Concepts and Techniques”
       Hartcourt India P Ltd, 2001
[R3] Paul Zikopoulos, Dirk deRoos, Krishnan Parasuraman, Thomas Deutsch, James Giles, David Corrigan
      Harness the Power of Big Data The IBM Big Data Platform
       Tata McGraw Hill Publications, 2012
[R4] Zikopoulos, Paul, Chris Eaton
      Understanding Big Data: Analytics for Enterprise Class Hadoop and Streaming Data
       Tata McGraw Hill Publications, 2011