Paper Code: ETEE-210
Paper: Electromagnetic Field Theory


UNIT I
Introduction:
  Review of scalar and vector field, Dot and Cross products, Coordinate Systems-Cartesian, cylindrical and spherical.
  Vector representation of surface, Physical interpretation of gradient divergence and curl, Transformation of vectors in different co-ordinate systems, dirac-delta function.
Electrostatics:
  Electric field due to point-charges, line charges and surface charges, Electrostatic potential, Solution of Laplace and Poisson’s equation in one dimension, M-method of image applied to plain boundaries, field mapping and conformal transformation, Electric flux density, Boundary conditions.
Capacitance:
  calculation of capacitance for simple rectangular, cylindrical and spherical geometries, Electrostatic energy.
[T1,T2]

UNIT II
Magnetostatics:
  Magnetic Induction and Faraday’s Law, Magnetic Flux Density, Magnetic Field Strength H, Ampere, Gauss Law in the Differential Vector Form, Permeability, Energy Stored in a Magnetic Field, Ampere’s Law for a Current Element, Volume Distribution of Current, Ampere’s Law Force Law, Magnetic Vector Potential, The Far Field of a Current Distribution.
Maxwell’s Equations:
  Equation of Continuity for Time Varying Fields, Inconsistency of Ampere’s Law, Maxwell’s Equations, Conditions at a Boundary Surface.
[T1,T2]

UNIT III
Electromagnetic Waves:
  Continuity equations, Displacement current, Maxwell’s equation, Boundary conditions, Plane wave equation and its solution in conducting and non-conducting media, Phasor notation, Phase velocity, Group velocity, Depth of penetration, Conductors and dielectrics, Impedance of conducting medium.
  Polarization, Reflection and refraction of plane waves at plane boundaries, Poynting vectors and Poynting theorem.
[T1,T2]

UNIT IV
Transmission Lines:
  Transmission line equations, Characteristic impendence, Distortion-less lines, Input impedence of a loss less line, computation of primary and secondary constants, Open and Short circuited lines, Standing wave and reflection losses, Impedance matching, Loading of lines, Input impedance of transmission lines, RF lines, Relation between reflection coefficient and voltage standing wave ratio (VSWR), Lines of different lengths – λ/2, λ/4, λ/8 lines, Losses in transmission lines, Smith chart and applications, impedance matching Single stub, Double stub.
[T1,T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Matthew N.O. Sadiku
      “Elements of Electromagnetics”
       Oxford University Press
[T2] E.C. Jordon, K.G. Balman
      “Electromagnetic Waves & Radiation System”, 2nd Edition
       PHI

Reference Books:
[R1] William H. Hayt
      “Engineering Electromagnetics”
       TMH
[R2] J.D. Kraus
      “Electromagnetics”
       TMH
[R3] David K. Cheng
      ”Field and Wave Electromagnetic”, 2nd Edition
       Pearson Education Asia, 2001
[R4] John R. Reitz
      “Foundations of Electromagnetic Theory”
       Pearson