Paper Code: ETAT-403 L T/P C
Paper: Mechatronics 3 0 3
Objective: Mechatronics is the combination of mechanical and electronics automation and computers.
Nowadays all the mechanical machines have been made computer controlled. The Subject details the basic
hardware and software elements used for proper and successful operation of various equipments. The knowledge
of this subject will be helpful to students while working in industries.
UNIT - I
Mechanical Actuating Systems: Types of motion, Degrees of freedom, constraints, Kinematic Chains, Cam,
Gear and gear trains, Ratchet and pawl Belt drive, chain drive, Bearing, pre loading.
Hydraulic & Pneumatic Actuation Systems: Fluid power systems, hydraulic systems, Pneumatic systems,
system structure and signal flow, hydraulic pumps and Pressure Control Valves and regulation, air compressors
and treatment, Cylinders, Direction Control Valves, Process control valves, Rotary Actuators, Accumulators,
Amplifiers, and Pneumatic Sequencing Problems.
[T1] [T2] [No. of Hrs: 11]
UNIT - II
Electrical Actuation Systems: Switching Devices, Mechanical Switches – SPST, SPDT, DPDT, keypads;
Relays, Electronic sensors, Diodes, Thyristors, Transistors, solenoid operating Valve, Solenoid Operated
Hydraulic and Pneumatic Valves, Electro-Pneumatic Sequencing Problems. Control of DC Motors, Permanent
Magnet DC Motors, Bush less Permanent Magnet DC Motors, AC Motors and speed controls, Stepper Motors
and Controls, Servo Motors.
Digital Electronics and systems:
Number Systems, Binary Mathematics, Boolean Algebra, Gates and Integrated Circuits Like 7408, 7402,
Karnaugh Maps, Application of Logic Gates as: Parity Generators, Digital Comparators, BCD to Decimal
Decoders, Flip Flops and applications, sequential logic, Microprocessor and microcontrollers, programming,
instruction set, assembly language, C programming for Intel 8051 / 8082 micro-controller.
[T1] [T2] [No. of Hrs: 11]
UNIT - III
Sensors, transducers and application: Performance Terminology, Static and Dynamic Characteristics,
Displacement, Position and Proximity Sensors, Potentiometer Sensors, Strain Gauge Element, LVDT, Optical
Encoders, Pneumatic Sensors, Hall Effect Sensors, Tachogenerators, Strain Gauge Load Cell, Thermostats,
Photo Darlington. Interfacing Sensors in Mechatronic System.
System Interfacing and data acquisition:
Data acquisition systems, Data loggers, SCADA, Interfacing requirements, Buffers, Darlington Pair,
Handshaking, Serial and Parallel Port Interfacing, Peripheral Interface Adapters, Analog to Digital Conversion,
Digital To Analog Conversion, Sample and Hold Amplifiers, Multiplexers, Time Division Multiplexing, Digital
Signal Processing, Pulse Modulation, Component Interconnection and Impedance Matching, Interfacing Motor
drives. Electrical power supply and protection.
Introduction to signal conditioning: Signal Conditioning Processes, Inverting Amplifiers, Non Inverting
Amplifiers, Summing, Integrating, Differential, Logarithmic Amplifiers, Comparators, Amplifiers Error,
Filtering, wheatstone Bridge, Temperature Compensation, Thermocouple Compensation,
[T1] [T2] [No. of Hrs: 11]
UNIT - IV
Programmable logic controllers:
Programmable logic controllers (PLC) Structure, Input / Output Processing, principles of operation, PLC versus
computer, Programming Languages, programming using Ladder Diagrams, Logic Functions, Latching,
Sequencing, Timers, Internal Relays And Counters, Shift Registers, Master and Jump Controls, Jumps, Data
Movement, Code Conversion, Data handling and manipulation, selecting a PLC.
Case studies: Mechatronic approach to design, Boat Auto pilot, high speed tilting train, automatic car park
system, coin counter, engine management system, autonomous mobile system, antilock brake system control,
Auto-Focus Camera, Printer, Domestic Washing Machine, Optical Mark Reader, Bar Code Reader and Pick and
Place robot Arm, Using PLC for extending and retracting a pneumatic piston and two pneumatic pistons in
different combinations, control of vibrating machine, control of process tank, control of conveyor motor,
detecting, sorting and packaging unit.
[T1] [T2] [No. of Hrs: 11]
Text Book:
[T1] W. Bolton, “Mechatronics – Electronic control systems in Mechanical & Electrical Engineering”,
Pearson Education Ltd., 2003.
[T2] K. P. Ramachandran, G.K. Vijayaraghavan, M.S. Balasundaram, Mechatronics - Integrated Mechanical
Electronic Systems, Wiley;
Reference Books:
[R1] Joji P, Pneumatic Controls, Wiley.
[R2] Dan Necsulescu, Mechatronics, Pearson
[R3] David g Alciatore, Michael B Histand, “Introduction to Mechatronics and measurement systems”, Mc
Graw Hill Education.
[R4] A Smaili, F Mrad, “Mechatronics – Integrated Technologies for Intelligent Machines, Oxford
Higher Education.
[R5] Nitaigour Premchand Mahalik, “Mechatronics Principles, Concepts & Application”, Tata McGraw
Hill Publishing Co.Ltd., 2003.