Paper Code: ETEE-409 L T/P C
Paper: Power Distribution System 3 0 3
Objective: The objective of the paper is to enable the Electrical Engineering students to have knowledge of
Power Distribution System, an important aspect of overall Electricity Supply System.
UNIT- I
Introduction to sub-transmission and distribution system; classification of loads – residential, commercial,
agricultural, industrial and their characteristics; distribution system planning – short-term, mid-term, long-term,
load modeling and characteristics; definition of demand factor, utilization factor, load factor, plant factor,
diversity factor, loss factor; computer applications to distribution system automation; tariff.
[T1,T2][No. of hrs. 10]
UNIT- II
Distribution feeders, transformers and sub-stations; primary feeders – voltage level, radial and loop types,
uniformly distributed and non-uniformly distributed load; design considerations for secondary system – voltage
level, location of substation, rating, service area with primary feeders, optimal location; existing system
improvement.
[T1,T2][No. of hrs. 10]
UNIT- III
System analysis – voltage drop and power loss calculation; methods of solution for radial networks, three-phase
balanced primary lines, non-three-phase primary lines; loss reduction, voltage regulation, voltage control and
improvement, issues in quality of service – voltage sag, swell and flicker; application of capacitors to
distribution system – effect of series and shunt capacitors, power factor correction, economic justification for
capacitor with cost-benefit analysis aiming at most economic power factor, optimum location of capacitor.
[T1,T2][No. of hrs. 12]
UNIT-IV
Distribution sub-station bus schemes, description and comparison of switching schemes; types of common faults
and procedure for system fault calculation; protection – objectives, over current protection devices – fuses,
automatic circuit re-closers, automatic line sectionalizing, coordination of protective devices – fuse to fuse, fuse
to circuit breaker, re-closer to circuit breaker.
[T1,T2][No. of hrs. 10]
Text:
[T1] Turan Gonen, “Electric Power Distribution System Engineering”, McGraw Hill
[T2] Dale R. Patrick,” Electrical Distribution System”, 2nd Edition, CRC Press
References:
[R1] James A. Momoh, “Electric Power Distribution Automation, Protection and Control”, CRC Press
[R2] A. S. Pabla, “Electric Power Distribution”, Tata McGraw Hill