Paper Code: ETMT-403 L T/P C
Paper: Micro Electro Mechanical System & Nanotechnology 3 1 4


UNIT I
Introduction to MEMS:
Production engineering, ultra precision engineering, ICs, micro sensors, micro actuators, microelectronic fabrication, micro machining, Mechanical MEMS, MOEMS. Magnetic MEMS, RF MEMS, micro fluidic systems, Bio and Chemo devices, Nano technology, modeling and simulation, MEMS packaging & design considerations, Micro instrumentation.
[T1]

UNIT II
Micro Machining:
Photo lithography, structural and sacrificial materials, other lithography methods, Thin film deposition, impurity
doping, Etching, problem with bulk micro machining. Surface micro machining, wafer bonding.
System Modelling:
  System types, basic modelling elements in – Mechanical systems, electrical systems, fluid systems, thermal systems.
  Modeling hybrid systems.
Passive Components And Systems:
  System on a chip, passive electronic systems, passive mechanical systems.
Mechanical Sensors and Actuators:
  Principle of sensing and actuating, beam and cantilever, micro plates, capacitive effect, piezoelectric material, strain measurement, pressure measurement, flow measurement, MEMS gyroscope, shear mode piezo-actuator, gripping piezo-actuator, inch worm technology.
Thermal Sensors and Actuators:
  Heat transfer process, Thermistors, micro machined thermocouple probel, peltier effect heat pumps, thermal flow sensors, micro hotplate gas sensors, MEMS thermo vessels, pyro-electricity, shape memory alloys,
  Thermally actuated MEMS relay, Micro spring thermal actuator, data storage cantilever.
[T1]

UNIT III
Micro-Opto-Electromechanical Systems:
  Principle of MOEMS technology, properties of light, light modulators, beam splitters, micro lens, micro mirrors, light detectors, optical switch.
CNT and Nano Technology:
  Introduction, nanotechnology materials, Fullerenes, Carbon Nano Tubes, development and application of CNTs, properties of CNTs, molecular machine components.
[T1, T2]

UNIT IV
Simulation Based Micro and Nano System Design:
  FEM, design flow using simulation tool, Ansys Multi-physics, Atomistic to continuum theory, Analytical theory and computational modeling, multi-scale concepts and methods, complexity of multi scale systems.
Nano Materials:
  Silicon carbide, Nano particles of Alumina and Zirconia, Mechanical, Magnetic, Electric and optical properties.
[T1, T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Nitaigour Premchand Mahalik
      MEMS
       Mc Graw Hill
[T2] A.K. Bandhopadhyay
      Nano Materials
       New Age
