Paper Code: ETMT-405 L T/P C
Paper: Mechatronics System Design 3 0 3


UNIT - I
Introduction:
  Evolution of Mechatronics, origins, Multidisciplinary scenario.
Signal Theory and Engineering Tools:
  Signal nomenclature, Signal analysis and processing, Multi domain signal representation, Analysis and representation of periodic analog signals, discrete fourier transforms and fast fourier transform, analysis of signal in time frequency domain, Differential equation, Laplace transform, difference equation, Z-transform, power and energy of the signal.
Electrical components and Electronic devices:
  Introduction, Basics of electrical components, Basic of electronic devices.
Basics of digital technology:
  Number system, Gray codes, DNS architecture, Boolean Algebra, Logic states, logic functions, universal gates, combinational and sequential logic circuits, flip flops, Karnaugh maps, TTL & CMOS.
[T1][T2]

UNIT - II
Introduction to signal conditioning:
  Signal Conditioning Processes, Inverting Amplifiers, Non Inverting Amplifiers, Summing, Integrating, Differential, Logarithmic Amplifiers, Comparators, Amplifiers Error, Filtering, Wheatstone Bridge, Temperature Compensation, Thermocouple Compensation, Modeling of Mechanical systems and Simulations.
[T1][T2]

UNIT - III
Electrical Actuation Systems:
  Switching Devices, Mechanical Switches – SPST, SPDT, DPDT, Debouncing keypads; Relays, Solid State Switches, Diodes, Thyristors, Transistors, Solenoid Type Devices: Solenoid Operated Hydraulic and Pneumatic Valves, Control of DC Motors, Permanent Magnet DC Motors, Bush less Permanent Magnet DC Motors, AC Motors and speed controls, Stepper Motors and Controls, Servo Motors.
System Interfacing and data acquisition:
  Data acquisition systems, Data loggers, SCADA, Interfacing requirements, Buffers, Darlington Pair, Handshaking, Serial and Parallel Port Interfacing, Peripheral Interface Adapters, Analog to Digital Conversion, Digital To Analog Conversion, Sample and Hold Amplifiers, Multiplexers, Time Division Multiplexing, Digital Signal Processing, Pulse Modulation, Component Interconnection and Impedance Matching, Interfacing Motor drives.
  Electrical power supply and protection.
[T1][T2]

UNIT - IV
Programmable logic controllers:
  Programmable logic controllers(PLC) Structure, Input/Output Processing, principles of operation, PLC versus computer, Programming Languages, programming using Ladder Diagrams, Logic Functions, Latching, Sequencing, Timers, Internal Relays And Counters, Shift Registers, Master and Jump Controls, Jumps, Data Movement, Code Conversion, Data handling and manipulation, selecting a PLC.
Case Studies:
  Mechatronic approach to design, Boat Auto pilot, high speed tilting train, automatic car park system, coin counter, engine management system, autonomous mobile system, antilock brake system control, Auto-Focus Camera, Printer, Domestic Washing Machine, Optical Mark Reader, Bar Code Reader and Pick and Place robot Arm, Using PLC for extending and retracting a pneumatic piston and 2 pneumatic pistons in different combinations, control of vibrating machine, control of process tank, control of conveyor motor, detecting, sorting and packaging unit.
[T1][T2]

Text Books:
[T1] W. Bolton
      “Mechatronics – Electronic control systems in Mechanical & Electrical Engineering”
       Pearson Education Ltd, 2003
[T2] Nitaigour Premchand Mahalik
      Mechatronics principles, concepts and applications
       Tata Mc Graw Hill

Reference Books:
[R1] Joji P.
      Pneumatic Controls
       Wiley
[R2] Dan Necsulescu
      Mechatronics
       Pearson
[R3] David G. Alciatore, Michael B. Histand
      “Introduction to Mechatronics and measurement systems”
       Mc Graw Hill Education
[R4] A. Smaili, F. Mrad
      “Mechatronics – Integrated Technologies for Intelligent Machines"
       Oxford Higher Education
[R5] Nitaigour Premchand Mahalik
      “Mechatronics Principles, Concepts & Application”
       Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Co Ltd, 2003