Paper Code: ETEN-211
Paper: Environmental Chemistry and Microbiology


UNIT – I
Fundamentals of chemical kinetics, Acid-base chemistry of natural waters, Acid deposition, Trace metals in water.
Fundamentals of free radical chemistry, Smog and aerosols.
Stratospheric ozone depletion, Health aspects of ozone depletion, BOD and COD tests
[T1,T2]

UNIT – II
Grab and Composite Sampling for natural water bodies and industrial Effluents, Monitoring techniques and
toxic effects of organic compounds such as Phenols, Pesticides, Surfactants, Tannin, Lignin and Hydrocarbons.
Environmental toxicity and analysis: Principles of toxicity and standards, Analysis of Chromium,, Cobalt,
Manganese, Nickel, Copper, Mercury, Arsenic and Organo-metallic compounds. Chemical speciation of (Cu,
Pb, As, Hg, Cr).
[T1,T2]

UNIT – III
Microorganisms in water and wastewater engineering: Characteristics of water and sewage, Microbial
examination of water and wastewater, Taste and odours, coliform, bacteria tests, Heterotrophic Plate Count
(HPC). Bacterial growth, Kinetics of bacterial growth, Acclimatization of waste and microbial inhibition.
Biologically degradable Plastics and surface active substances. Microorganism in air pollution control (Bio
filters and bio scrubbers).
[T1,T2]

UNIT – IV
Bioremediation and Biorestoration: Use of microbes for improving soil fertility, Restoration of soils
contaminated with heavy metals/pesticides and other toxic organic chemicals.
Biochemistry and Microbiology of Landfills and Composting, Recycling and processing of organic residues,
Xenobiotics.
[T1,T2]

Text Books:
[T1] Sawyer C.N., McCarty P.L. and Parkin G.F.
      “Chemistry for Environmental Engineering and Science”
        Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd, New Delhi
[T2] Goel P.K.
       “Water Pollution, Causes, Effects and control”
         New Age International (P) Ltd, New Delhi

Reference Books
[R1] De A.K.
      “Environmental Chemistry"
        New Age International (P) Ltd, New Delhi
[R2] Khopkar S.M.
      “Environmental Pollution Analysis”
        New Age International (P) Ltd, New Delhi
[R3] Bhatia S.C.
      “Environmental Chemistry”
        CBS Publishers and Distributors, New Delhi
[R4] Pelczar M.J., Chan E.C.S., Krieg N.R.
      “Microbiology”
        Tata McGraw Hill Education (P) Ltd, New Delhi
[R5] Dara S.S.
      “A Textbook of Environmental Chemistry and Pollution Control”
        S. Chand and Company Ltd, New Delhi
[R6] Pani B.
      “Textbook of Environmental Chemistry”
        I.K. International Publishing House (P) Ltd, New Delhi