Paper Code: ETCE-418
Paper: FEM in Structural Engineering


UNIT-I
Boundary Value Problems and the Need for Numerical Discretisation:
   Introduction, examples of Continuum problems, history of finite element method.
Weighted residual methods:
   Approximation by trial functions, weighted residual forms, piecewise trial functions, weak formulation, Galerkin method, examples of 1-, 2- and 3-D problems.
[T1,T2]

UNIT-II
Higher order finite element approximation:
  Degree of polynomial in trial functions and rate of convergence, patch test, shape functions for C0 and C1 continuity, 1-, 2-and 3-D shape functions.
Isoperimetric formulation:
  The concept of mapping, isoperimetric formulation, numerical integration, mapping and its use in mesh generation.
[T1,T2]

UNIT-III
Variational Methods:
  Variational principles, establishment of natural Variational principles, approximate solution of differential equations by Rayleigh-Ritz method, the use of Lagrange multipliers, general Variational principles, penalty functions, least-square method.
Partial discretisation and time-dependent problems:
  Partial discretisation applied to boundary value problems, time-dependent problems via partial discretisation, analytical solution procedures, finite element solution procedures in time domain.
[T1,T2]

UNIT-IV
Generalized finite elements and error estimates:
  Generalized finite element method, the discretisation error in a numerical solution, measure of discretisation error, estimate of discretisation error.
Coordinate Transformation:
  Transformation of vectors and tensors, transformation of stiffness matrices, degree of freedom within elements, condensation, condensation and recovery algorithm, sub structuring, structural symmetry.
[T1,T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Zienkiewicz, O.C., and Morgan, K.
      Finite Element Approximation
       John Wiley and Sons
[T2] Reddy, J.N.
      An Introduction to the Finite Element Method
       McGraw Hill

References:
[R1] Huebner, K.H., Thornton, E.A., and Byrom, T.G.
      The Finite Element Method for Engineers
       John Wiley
[R2] Hutton, D.V.
      Fundamentals of Finite Element Analysis
       McGraw Hill
[R3] Kikuchi, N.
      Finite Element Methods in Mechanics
       Cambridge University Press
[R4] Cook, R.D., Malkus, D.S., Plesha, M.E., and Witt, R.J.
      Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis
       John Wiley and Sons
[R5] Zienkiewicz, O.C., and Taylor, R.L.
      The Finite Element Method, Vol. I and II
       McGraw Hill