Paper Code: ETCE-424
Paper: Offshore Structural Engineering


UNIT I
Concrete/composites:
  Underwater concrete, mix design, quick setting compounds, high strength grout, fiber reinforced plastics, special composite materials for under water repairs.
Structural Steel:
  Corrosion Mechanism; Types of corrosion; Seawater corrosion; corrosion allowance, cathodic protection design, impressed current method, sacrificial anodes design, protective coatings, splash zone protection, cathodic protection monitoring system.
Underwater repair:
  Underwater welding, repair schemes for tubular members, grouted sleeve connections, and stressed–grouted connections for tubular joints.
[T1,T2]

UNIT II
Static Structural Analysis:
  Estimation of wave and current loading on framed structures.
  Maximum base shear and overturning methods.
  Cyclic loads for fatigue analysis.
Dynamic Structural analysis:
  Dynamic analysis of framed structures.
  Mode shapes and Eigen frequency analysis.
  Wave response, dynamic wave response, frequency and time domain analysis of risers and pipelines.
[T1,T2]

UNIT III
Loads on offshore structures:
  Wind Loads.
  Wave and Current Loads.
  Calculation based on Maximum base.
  Shear and Overturning Moments.
  Design Wave heights and Spectral Definition.
  Hydrodynamic Coefficients and Marine Growth.
  Fatigue Load Definition and Joint Probability distribution.
  Seismic Loads.
[T1,T2]

UNIT IV
Foundation for Offshore Structures:
  Mud-mats: bearing capacity, sliding stability, over-turning stability, short term and long term settlements, factor of safety.
  Bucket foundation; Suction anchors; Gravity foundation.
[T1,T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Mohamed Abdallah El-Reedy. Offshore Structures: Design, Construction and Maintenance, Elsevier
[T2] Hydrodynamics of Offshore Structures by S.K. Chakrabarti, Springer-Verlag

References:
[R1] Handbook of Offshore Engineering by S.K. Chakrabarti, Elseviers, 2005.
[R2] Structural Stability - Theory and Implementation by W.F.Chen and E.M.Lui by Elsevier
[R3] Construction of Marine and Offshore Structures by Ben C. Gerwick, CRC Press, 1999.
[R4] Dynamics of Offshore Structures by James F. Wilson – 2003, John Wiley and Sons
[R5] Construction of Marine and Offshore Structures by Ben C. Gerwick, Jr – 2007, CRC Press.