Paper Code: ETPE-303 L T/P C
Paper: Steam Generator and its Auxiliaries 3 1 4


UNIT-I
Coal:
  Types of coal and their characteristics, their suitability for different kinds of Boilers, Alternations in firing methods due to change of coal composition.
Coal Handling System:
  Location and layout, main equipments and their functions, coal transportation, preparation, storage and reclamation, MGR systems, safety aspects, fire prevention and fire fighting in Coal Handling Plant.
Combustion Theory:
  Definition, combustion requirements, factor influencing combustion, composition of fuels, gross and net calorific value.
Fuel Oil Systems:
  Location and site selection, types of fuels oils used main equipments and their functions, transportation, handling, storage, fuel oil preparation before firing.
[T1,T2,R1]

UNIT-II
Description of Main Boiler:
  Classification and types, arrangements of main boiler, fundamentals of boiler design, location of various pressure parts.
Boiler Circulation Theory:
  Water walls, boiling phenomena, nucleate/film boiling, natural/controlled/forced circulation.
  Construction Details of Super Heaters, Re-heaters, Economizers, De-super heaters.
Steam Separation Theory:
  Boiler Drum & its internals.
[T1, T2, R1]

UNIT-III
Draught System:
  Theory of natural, induced, balance and forced draught, drought loss, stack effect.
Various Fans and their salient features:
  Construction details/lubricating oil system for PA Fan, FD Fan, ID Fan.
Air Pre-heaters:
  Types and functions, constructional details, SCAPH, soot blowers.
Ventilation and Air Conditioning, Pulverisers and Feeders:
  Classification of mills, constructional features of bowl mill, pulverization of coal, factors affecting milling plant performance, coal feeders and its type.
Fuel Firing Arrangements and Burners:
  Corner, front and rear wall firing, Direct and indirect firing, details of coal and oil burners, burners tilting mechanism, atomization of fuel oil in oil burners and ignitors.
[T1,R2]

UNIT-IV
Electrostatic Precipitator (ESP):
  Need of fly ash separation, working principle, corona effect, constructional details, rapping mechanism.
Ash Handling System:
  Fly ash handling system, bottom ash disposal system, ash handling plant operation, ash handling pump, disposal of ash slurry, utilization of ash.
Plant Visit:
  Milling plant, main boiler and fans, ash handling.
Furnace, Safeguard, Supervisory System (FSSS):
  Description of Field equipments (no C&I).FSSS
Water Supply System:
  Soft Water, Circulated Water, Cooling Water, and D.M. Water.
[T1,T2,R1,R2]


Text Books:
[T1] “Power Plant Familiarization”– Vol. II
       NPTI Publication
[T2] P.K. Nag
      “Power Plant Engineering”
        Tata McGraw Hill Publications

References Books:
[R1] Arora & S. Domkundwar
      “A Course in Power Plant Engineering”
        Dhanpat Rai & Sons
[R2] “Modern Power Station Practice”, Volume B
       British Electricity International Ltd, Central Electricity Generating Board
        Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1991