Paper Code: ETEE-253 L T/P C
Paper: Electrical Machines−I Lab 0 2 1
EXP: 1 To study the construction and operation of various types of starters available in the laboratory for
starting DC motors.
EXP:2 To study the magnetization characteristics of a separately excited D.C generator at different speeds
and to find the critical field resistance at those speeds.
EXP:3 To perform the load test on D.C. shunt motor and to draw the performance characteristics.
EXP:4 To control the speed of a DC shunt motor by using
a) Field control
b) Armature/Rheostatic control
c) Supply voltage control
EXP: 5 To perform the Swinburne’s test on a D.C. shunt Machine and to pre determine its efficiency when
running as a motor as well as generator and also draw the characteristic curves.
EXP: 6 To conduct load test on DC shunt generator and obtain its internal and external characteristics.
EXP: 7 To perform O.C./S.C. tests on a single phase transformer and determine equivalent circuit parameters.
EXP: 8 To perform Sumpner’s (back to back) test on two identical single phase transformers and draw the
load efficiency graphs.
EXP: 9 To perform load test on a single-phase transformer and determine the following:
(a) Voltage ratio of transformer.
(b) Efficiency at different loads.
(c) Voltage regulation of the transformer.
EXP: 10 To perform Polarity test on two single-phase transformers, connect them in parallel and study the load
sharing between them.
EXP: 11 To convert a three-phase supply into two phase supply using Scott-connection between two single
phase transformers with suitable tapping. Verify the following:
(a) Turn ratio between windings of main and teaser transformers.
(b) Voltage of both phases of two phase supply is equal.
(c) Whether the phase angle between them is 900.
EXP: 12 To connect three-phase transformers in Y- Y / Y - Δ , Δ-Δ/Δ- Y connections and study line /phase
voltage relationships.
Books:
[T1]. Laboratory Operations for Rotating Electric Machinery and Transformer Technology, Donald V.
Richardson, Prentice Hall, 1980
[T2] Electric Machinery Experiments: Laboratory Practices and Simulation Studies,
Sailendra Nath Bhadra, Alpha Science International Ltd, 2013