Paper Code: ETEE-416
Paper: Electrical Energy Conservation


UNIT I
Energy Conservation and Energy Policies
Energy policies of India and their development, Central and estate Policies on the consumption and wastage of
energy, need of renewable energy in India, Energy efficiency, Energy accounting, monitoring and control,
Electricity audit and related instruments, Energy consumption models, Specific Energy Consumption, ECO
assessment and Evaluation methods Energy conservation schemes, Investment in energy saving equipments,
subsidies and tax rebates, Development of Energy Management System.
[T1,R1]

UNIT II
Energy Conservation in Electrical Installations
Electric loads of air conditioning and refrigeration, Energy conservation, Power consumption in compressors,
Energy conservation measures, Electrolytic process, Electric heating, Furnace operation and scheduling,
Transformer loading ,efficiency analysis, Feeder loss evaluation, Reactive Power, Power factor and its
improvement, Capacitor sizing, Capacitor losses, location, placement and maintenance, Case studies.
[T1,R1]

UNIT III
Energy Efficient Motors
Types and operating characteristics of electric motors, Energy efficient control and starting – Load matching,
Selection of motors, Efficiency and load analysis, Energy efficiency, High efficiency motors, Industrial drives,
Control schemes, Variable speed drives and Energy conservation schemes, Pumps and fans, Efficient control
strategies, Over-sizing Case studies.
[T1,R1]

UNIT IV
Energy Efficient Building / Green Building
Energy Conservation in Buildings Air conditioning, monitoring and control systems of energy efficient
buildings. Principle of Energy efficient building design water heading system, photovoltaic systems and Energy
conservation in lighting schemes, Energy efficient light sources, Domestic, commercial and industrial lighting,
Lighting controls, Luminaries.
[T2,R5]


Text Books:-
[T1] H. Partab, “Art and Science of Utilisation of Electrical Energy”, Pritam.
[T2] S.C. Tripathy, “ Electric Energy Utilization and Conservation”, Tata McGraw Hill

Reference Books:
[R1] Bureau of Energy efficiency of India.
[R2] IEEE Bronze Book: IEEE Standard 739-1984 – Recommended Practice for Energy Conservation and
Cost Effective Planning in Industrial Facilities, IEEE Publications, 1996.
[R3] A.P.W. Thumann: Plant Engineers and Managers Guide to Energy conservation, 7e, UNR, 1977.
[R4] W.C. Turner, Energy Management Handbook, 2e, Fairmont press, 1993.
[R5] UNESCAP – Guide Book on Promotion of Sustainable Energy Consumption.