Paper Code: ETPE-404 L T/P C
Paper: Environment Management 3 0 3
Objective: The objective of the paper is to facilitate the student with the basics of Environmental Management and
Energy conservation that are required for a power engineering student.
UNIT-I
Energy Management And Energy Audit
Energy Scenario, Basics of energy and its various forms. Material and energy balance, Energy action planning,
Energy monitoring and targeting. Fuels and combusion, Boilers, FBC boilers, Steam system, Furnaces, Insulation
and refractory.
Heat exchangers, co-generation. Electrical Systems, Electric Motors and variable speed drive, Lighting systems.
[T1,T2][No. of Hrs. 12]
UNIT-II
D.G. Set system, Energy efficient technology in electrical systems. Fans and blowers, Pumps and pumping
systems, Compressors and compressed air systems. HVAC and refrigeration systems, cooling towers.
Application of Non-conventional and Renewable energy sources, Wastes minimization and Resource
Conservation, Waste heat recovery.
Environmental Management
Air Pollution
Air Pollution Standards; Effects of Air Pollutants on Materials, Vegetation and Health Origin and Fate of
Pollutants (Carbon monoxide, Hazardous Air Pollutants, Lead, Nitrogen Dioxide, Photochemical Oxidants,
Sulphur Oxides, Particulates) Acid Rain, Ozone depletion & Greenhouse effect.
[T1,T2][No. of Hrs. 11]
UNIT-III
Waste Water Treatment
Waste water Microbiology, Characteristics of Waste Water, Municipal and Industrial waste water treatment, Unit
operation of Pretreatment, Primary Treatment, Unit processes of Secondary treatment, disinfections, Land
treatment, Sludge treatment and disposal.
Solid Waste Management
Waste characteristics, Disposal by Sanitary landfill, thermal conversion; combustion or incineration system,
Pyrolysis, Gasification, Pelletization. Waste to Energy, Resource conservation and recovery, Biological
processing of Solid wastes.
[T1,T2][No. of Hrs. 12]
UNIT-IV
Hazardous Wastes Management: Characteristics of Hazardous Waste, Management of Hazardous Waste;
Chemical. Oxidation, vitrification, Hazardous wastes landfills, Radioactive waste; Detection and analysis,
classification and disposal of Radioactive Wastes, Fly ash characteristics and disposal, Site remediation
techniques.
Environmental Impact Assessment :Legal Framework, Purpose, EIA methodology; Baseline studies, Prediction
of impacts, Evaluation of Impact and Environmental management plan, Environmental Audit.
[T1,T2][No. of Hrs. 11]
Text Books:
[T1] Energy Management, Murphy WR, Mc Kay G, Butterworth Heinamn 20091
[T2] Environmental Engg –A Design Approach , Sincereo, Arcadio P, PHI
[T3] Environmental Engineering, Water Supply, Sanitary Engineering and Pollutuion Kamala A Rao, Tata
MC – Graw Hill
References Books:
[R1] Environmental Engineering, Dean J, Horward S, Mc Grwa Hill -1985
[R2] Energy Management handbook, John Weiley and Sones – Wayne C. Turner