Paper Code: ETMA-201
Paper: Applied Mathematics-III


UNIT-I
Fourier series:
  Definition, Euler’s formula, conditions for Fourier expansion, functions having points of discontinuity, change of intervals, even and odd functions ,half range series, Harmonic analysis.
Fourier Transforms:
  Definition, Fourier integral, Fourier transform, inverse Fourier transform, Fourier sine and cosine transforms, properties of Fourier transforms(linearity, scaling, shifting, modulation), Application to partial differential equations.
[T2]

UNIT-II
Difference equation:
  Definition, formation, solution of linear difference equation with constant coefficients, simultaneous difference equations with constant coefficients, applications of difference equations.
Z-transform:
  Definition, Z-transform of basic functions, properties of Z-transform (linearity, damping, shifting, multiplication),initial value theorem, final value theorem, convolution theorem, convergence of Z-transform, inverse of Z-transform, Application to difference equations.
[T2]

UNIT-III
Numerical Methods:
  Solution of algebraic and transcendental equations using bisection method, Regula-Falsi method and Newton–Raphson method.
  Solution of linear simultaneous equations using Gauss-Jacobi’s iteration method and Gauss-Seidal’s iteration methods.
Finite differences:
  Forward differences, backward differences and Central differences.
Interpolation:
  Newton’s interpolation for equi-spaced values. Stirling’s central difference interpolation formula, Divided differences and interpolation formula in terms of divided differences, Lagrange’s interpolation formula for unequi-spaced values.
[T1,T2]

UNIT-IV
Numerical Differentiation, maxima and minima of a tabulated function.
Numerical Integration:
  Newton-Cote’s quadrature formula, Trapezoidal rule, Simpson’s one-third rule and Simpson’s three-eighth rule.
Numerical solution of ordinary differential equations:
  Picard’s method, Taylor’s method, Euler’s method, modified Euler’s method, Runge-Kutta method of fourth order.
[T1,T2]


Text Books:
[T1] R.K. Jain and S.R.K. Iyengar
      ”Numerical methods for Scientific and Engineering Computation”
       New Age Publishing Delhi, 2014
[T2] B.S. Grewal
      ”Higher Engineering Mathematics”
       Khanna Publications, 2014 Edition

Reference Books:
[R1] E. Kresyzig
      ”Advance Engineering Mathematics”
       Wiley publications
[R2] P.B. Patil and U.P. Verma
      “Numerical Computational Methods”
       Narosa
[R3] "Partial Differential Equations”
       Schaum’s Outline Series
        McGraw-Hill
[R4] Michael Greenberg
      “Advance Engineering mathematics”
       Pearson
[R5] Schaum’s Outline on Fourier Analysis with Applications to Boundary Value Problem
      Tata McGraw-Hill