Paper Code: ETEE-211
Paper: Electrical Machines-I


UNIT I
Principles of EMEC: Energy in Electro-Magnetic Systems, Flow of Energy in Electro-Mechanical Devices,
Energy and co-energy in Magnetic field, Singly and doubly excited systems, Electromagnetic and Reluctance
Torque.
DC Generators: Constructional features, Armature winding details, lap & wave connections, EMF equation,
separately excited, shunt, series and compound connected D.C. generators process of voltage build up in shunt
generators, Characteristics and applications of separately/self-excited generators.
[T1, T2]

UNIT II
DC Generators (Contd.): Armature Reaction, Demagnetizing and Cross-magnetizing armature MMF,
Interpoles and compensating windings, commutation process and its improvement.
D.C. Motors: Speed and Torque Equation of D.C. motors, Characteristics of D.C. series, shunt and compound
motors and their applications, Starting and speed control of D.C. motors, Braking of D.C. motors, Efficiency and
testing of D.C. Machines, Introduction of D.C. servo motor and permanent magnet / brushless D.C. motors.
[T1, T2]

UNIT III
Single phase Transformers: Transformer construction and practical considerations. Equivalent circuit(Exact
and approximate), per unit values, Phasor diagram, Transformer testing : open circuit test, Short Circuit test,
Sumpner’s test, Efficiency and voltage regulation, All day efficiency.
[T1, T2]

UNIT IV
3 phase Transformers: Three-phase Bank of Single-phase Transformers, Parallel operations of 1-phase and 3-
phase transformers, load division between transformers in parallel. Three winding transformers, Zigzag
connections, vector grouping with clock convention, tertiary winding, tap changing, phase conversions-3phase to
2 phase and 3phase to 6 phase.
Special Purpose Transformers: Auto-transformers. Welding, Traction, Instruments and pulse Transformers.
[T1, T2]


TEXT BOOKS:
[T1] Electric Machinery, A Fitzgerald, Charles Kingsley, Stephen Umans, Tata McGraw Hill Education, 6th Edition, 2002.
[T2] Electrical Machines with MATLAB, Turan Gnen, CRC Press,Taylor&Francis, 2nd edition, 1998.

REFERENCE BOOKS:
[R1] The Performance and Design of Alternating Current Machines, M.G. Say, CBS Publishers, 2005
[R2] Electro-Mechanical Energy Conversion with Dynamics of Machines, Rakosh Das Begamudre, Wiley- Blackwell, 1988.
[R3 Performance and Design of Direct Current Machines: AE Clayton and NN Hancock, CBS Publishers, 2014
[R4] Oblems in Electrical Engineering: Power engineering and electronics with answers Partly Solved in I. Units: Parker Smith , CBS Publishers, 9th edition, 2003
[R5] Electric Machines, I J Nagrath D P Kothari, Mc Graw-Hill Education, 3rd edition, 2011
[R6] Samarjit Ghosh, “Electrical Machines”, Pearson