Paper Code: ETME-207
Paper: Material Science & Metallurgy


UNIT – I
Structure of metal:
  Crystal structure (BCC, FCC and HCP, Packing factor and density calculation), X-ray diffraction, miller indices, lattices, imperfections, elementary treatment of point and line defects and their relation to mechanical properties.
Diffusion:
  Diffusion mechanisms, steady state and non steady state diffusion, factors affecting diffusion
Deformation:
  Slip, twinning, effect of cold and hot working on mechanical properties, principles of recovery, re-crystallization and gain growth.
[T1,T2]

UNIT – II
Fracture:
  Types of fracture ductile and brittle, fatigue
Creep:
  Basic consideration in the selection of material for high and low temperature service, creep curve, effect of material variables on creep properties, brittle failure at low temperature.
Solidification:
  Phases in metal system, lever rule, solidification of metal and alloys, solid solution, eutectic, eutectoid and inter-metallic compounds, Iron carbon equilibrium diagram, TTT-diagram. Effect of alloying elements on TTT diagram, S-N curve.
[T1,T2]

UNIT - III
Heat Treatment:
  Principles and purpose of heat treatment of plain carbon steels, annealing, normalizing, hardening, tempering, isothermal treatment, case hardening – carburizing, nitriding etc, precipitating hardening of aluminum alloys.
Hardenability:
  determination of hardenability Jominy end quench test.
Materials:
  Plain Carbon steels, effect of alloying elements, properties, uses, springs, and wear resisting steels, IS standards codes for steels.
[T1,T3]

UNIT - IV
Corrosion:
  Types of corrosion, Galvanic cell, rusting of Iron, Methods of protection from corrosion.
Fiber Reinforced Composites:
  General characteristics, Applications, Introduction to Fibers – glass, carbon, Kevlar 49 fibers.
  Matrix – Polymeric, Metallic, Ceramic Matrix, Coupling agents and fillers.
[T1,T3]


Text Books:
[T1] Callister
      “Materials Science and Engineering”: An Introduction, 6th Edition
[T2] Parashivamurthy K.I
       “Material Science and Metallurgy”
        Pearson
[T3] Sidney H. Avner
      ”Introduction to Physical Metallurgy”
        Tata McGraw-Hill,New Delhi-1997

Reference Books:
[R1] Degarmo E. Paul et.al
      “Materials & Processes in Manufacture”
        Prentice Hall India, New Delhi, 2001
[R2] L. Krishna Reddi
      “Principles of Engineering Metallurgy”
        New Age Publication, New Delhi, 2001
[R3] Buduisky et al
      “Engineering Materials & Properties”
        Prentice Hall India, New Delhi, 2004
[R4] Peter Haasten
      “Physical Metallurgy”
        Cambridge Univ. Press, 1996
[R5] Raymond A. Higgin
      “Engineering Metallurgy Part 1”
        Prentice Hall India, New Delhi, 1998