Paper Code: ETIC–405 L T/P C
Paper: Artificial Neural Networks 3 1 4


UNIT - I
Introduction:
  Neural networks characteristics, History of development in neural networks principles, Artificial neural terminology, Model of a neuron, Topology, Neural Networks: biological concepts, neuron model, transfer functions, feed forward, feedback, supervised and unsupervised models, Learning methods- Hebbs, delta, backpropagation and competitive learning.
[T1, T2]

UNIT - II
Learning Methods & Neural Network Models:
  Fundamental Concepts and Models, Learning Process, Learning Rules, Single Layer Perceptron Classifier, Multilayer Feedforward Network, Single-Layer Feedback Networks, types of learning, Supervised, Unsupervised, Re-inforcement learning, Knowledge, representation and acquisition.
  Basic Hop field model, Competitive learning, K-means clustering algorithm, Kohonen‘s feature maps.
[T1, T2]

UNIT - III
Artificial Neural Networks:
  Autoassociative Memory, Performance Analysis of Recurrent Autoassociative Memory, Bidirectional Autoassociative Memory, Associative Memory of Spatio-temporal Patterns Radial basis function neural networks, Basic earning laws in RBF nets, Recurrent back propagation.
 Introduction to counter propagation networks, CMAC network and ART networks.
 Matching and Self-Organizing Networks Hamming Net and MAXNET, Unsupervised Learning of Clusters, Counter propagation Network, Feature Mapping, Self-Organizing Feature Maps, Cluster Discovery Network.
[T1, T2]

UNIT – IV
Applications of neural networks:
  Applications such as pattern recognition, Pattern mapping, Associative memories, Optimization, Speech and decision-making, VLSI implementation of neural networks.
[T1, T2]


Text Books:
[T1] B. Yegnanarayana
      “Artificial Neural Networks”
       PHI
[T2] J.M. Zurada
      “Introduction to artificial neural systems”
       Jaico Publishing House

Reference Books:
[R1] S. Rajasekaran, G.A. Vijaylakshmi Pai
      “Neural Network, Fuzzy Logic & Genetic Algorithms Synthesis & Application”, 1st edition
       PHI, 2009
[R2] Simon Haykin
      “Neural Networks”, 3rd edition
       PHI, 2010