Paper Code: ETCS-402
Paper: Machine Learning


UNIT-I
Introduction:
Basic concepts:
  Definition of learning systems, Goals and applications of machine learning. Aspects of developing a learning system: training data, concept representation, function approximation.
Types of Learning:
  Supervised learning and unsupervised learning.
Overview of classification:
  setup, training, test, validation dataset, over fitting.
Classification Families:
  linear discriminative, non-linear discriminative, decision trees, probabilistic (conditional and generative), nearest neighbor.
[T1, T2]

UNIT-II
Logistic regression, Perceptron, Exponential family, Generative learning algorithms, Gaussian discriminant analysis, Naive Bayes, Support vector machines: Optimal hyper plane, Kernels.
Model selection and feature selection.
Combining classifiers: Bagging, boosting (The Ada boost algorithm), Evaluating and debugging learning algorithms, Classification errors.
[T1, T2]

UNIT-III
Unsupervised learning:
  Clustering.
  K-means.
  EM Algorithm.
  Mixture of Gaussians.
  Factor analysis.
  PCA (Principal components analysis), ICA (Independent components analysis), latent semantic indexing.
  Spectral clustering, Markov models Hidden Markov models (HMMs).
[T1, T2]

UNIT-IV
Reinforcement Learning and Control:
  MDPs.
  Bellman equations, Value iteration and policy iteration, Linear quadratic regulation (LQR).
  LQG.
  Q-learning.
  Value function approximation, Policy search.
  Reinforce.
  POMDPs.
[T1, T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Tom M. Mitchell
      Machine Learning
       McGraw Hill Education
[T2] Bishop, C.
      Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning
       Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2006
[T3] Duda, Richard, Peter Hart, and David Stork
      Pattern Classification, 2nd ed
       New York, NY: Wiley-Interscience, 2000. ISBN: 9780471056690.
[T4] Tom M. Mitchell
      Machine Learning, 1st Edition
       ISBN – 9781259096952, McGraw-Hill Series
Reference Books:
[R1] Bishop, Christopher
      Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition
       New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1995. ISBN: 9780198538646.
[R2] Ethem Alpaydin
      Introduction to Machine Learning
       MIT Press, Prentice Hall of India