Paper Code: ETCS-420
Paper: Service Oriented Architecture


UNIT-I
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA):
  Introduction, Evolution, Fundamental SOA, Common Characteristics of contemporary SOA, Benefits of SOA, Common misperceptions about SOA, Promise and Challenges of SOA, Drivers, Dimensions, Key components, Perspectives.
SO Architectures:
  Architectures like Enterprise architecture, software architecture, SOA Reference architecture overview, The roots of SOA (comparing SOA to Past architectures).
Enterprise-wide SOA:
  Services-orientation and the enterprise, Considerations, Layers, Strawman architecture and other architectures, Application Development process, SOA methodology for Enterprise, Enterprise Applications.
[T1]

UNIT-II
Service-Oriented Enterprise Applications:
  Considerations, Patterns for SOA, SOA Programming Models.
SOA Analysis and Design:
  Principles and best practices of Service Design, Designing - Activity Services, Data Services, Client Services, Business process services.
Designing SOA:
  Business architecture, Business Process Models (Creating, Management & Modeling).
Service Context and common Semantics:
  Importance of Semantics in SOA, Core information modeling, defining types, Beyond the basics, structuring information models, documents and XML, XML: Schema and Patterns, Best practices for SOA Architect.
[T2]

UNIT-III
Designing Service interfaces:
  Services, Design Guidelines, Interface Design, Solution model.
Designing Service implementations:
  Basic Service architecture, Implementing: interface layer, business layer, Resource layer.
Composing Services:
  Understanding, Architectural models, implementation, business rules and Transactions.
Designing and Using Integration in SOA Solutions:
  Challenges of Integration in SOA, Special Considerations for implementing Integration.
[T1, T2]

UNIT-IV
SOA Security:
  Goals and fundamentals, Web service security Standards and specifications, SOA Security blueprints.
SOA Governance:
  Management and governance defined, Case for SOA governance, service life cycle, Developing and Registering Run Time policies, Run time policy enforcement and adaptation.
  Approach for Enterprise-wide SOA Implementation.
  SOA Applications and various Case Studies.
[T1, T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Michael Rosen, Boris Lublinsky, Kevin T Smith, Marc J Balcer
      “Applied SOA: Service Oriented Architectures and Design Strategies”
       Wiley Reprint 2014
[T2] Shankar Kambhampaly
      “Service –Oriented Architecture for Enterprise and Cloud Applications”
       Wiley

Reference Books:
[R1] Thomas Erl
      "SOA Principles of Service Design"
       Prentice Hall
[R2] Roshen
      "SOA based Enterprise Integration"
       TMH publications
[R3] Eric Newcomer, Greg Lomow
      “Understanding SOA with Web Services”
       Pearson Education