Paper Code: ETCS-416
Paper: Software Project Management


UNIT-I
Introduction to Software Project Management (SPM):
  Definition of a Software Project (SP), SP vs other types of projects activities covered by SPM, categorizing SPs, project as a system, management control.
Software Project scheduling and planning:
  Basic concepts, project scheduling, defining a task set and task network, scheduling, earned value analysis indicators, Project elements, WBS [Work Breakdown Structure] .
  Selecting a project, identifying project scope and objectives, identifying project infrastructure, analyzing project cZaracteristics, identifying project products and activities.
[T1, T2]

UNIT-II
Project Estimation and Evaluation:
  software project estimation, decomposition techniques, empirical estimation models, estimation for object oriented projects, estimation for Agile development and Web engineering projects.
  Cost benefit analysis, cash flow forecasting, cost benefit evaluation techniques, risk evaluation.
  Selection of an appropriate project report; choice of process model, structured methods, rapid application development, water fall, spiral models, Prototyping delivery, Albrecht function point analysis.
[T1, T2]

UNIT-III
Activity planning:
  Objectives of activity planning, project schedule, projects and activities, sequencing and scheduling activities, Network planning model; Network Diagrams : CPM, Bar Charts, Gantt Chart, PERT [ Activity-on-arrow network; Activity on Node network ] Precedence network; Forward pass; Backward pass; Critical path.
Risk Analysis and Management:
  Risk and risk types, Risk Break down Structure, Risk management process, Evaluating schedule risk using PERT.
[T1, T2]

UNIT-IV
Resource allocation &Monitoring the control:
  Introduction, the nature of resources, identifying resource requirements, visualizing progress, Project Tracking, Status Reports, Milestone Analysis, Actual Versus Estimated Analysis of Effort and Schedule.
Software quality and project closure:
  Defining software quality attributes, ISO:9126, Software quality measures, Project Closure Analysis, The Role of Closure Analysis, Performing Closure Analysis.
[T1, T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Software Project Management (2nd Edition)
      Bob Hughes and Mike Cottrell, 1999
       TMH
[T2] Software Project Management
      Walker Royce, 1998
       Addison Wesley

Reference Books:
[R1] R.S. Pressman
      Software Engineering, 7th ed
       TMH
[R2] Pankaj Jalote
      Software project management in practice
       Addison-Wesley
[R3] Robert T. Futrell, Donald F. Shafer, and Linda I. Shafer
      “Quality Software Project Management”, 2002
       Pearson Education Asia
[R4] Ramesh Gopalaswamy
      “Managing Global Software Projects”, 2003
       Tata McGraw-Hill
[R5] S.A. Kelkar
      “Software Project Management”