Paper Code: ETME–303 L T/P C
Paper: Heat Transfer 3 1 4


UNIT – I
Basic Concepts: Mechanism of Heat Transfer, Conduction, Convection and Radiation.
Conduction: Fourier Law of Conduction, Thermal Resistance and its electrical Analogy, General Differential
equation of Heat Conduction in Cartesian and Cylindrical Coordinates, One Dimensional Steady State Heat
Conduction with and without heat generation through Plane Wall, Cylinders and Spherical systems. Composite
Systems, Extended Surfaces, Methods for solving two-dimensional steady state conduction problems. Unsteady
Heat Conduction, Lumped Analysis, Use of Heislers Chart. Critical Thickness of Insulation.
[T1, T2, T3]

UNIT - II
Convection: Basic Concepts, Heat Transfer Coefficients, Boundary Layer Concept, Types of Convection
Forced Convection: Dimensional Analysis, External Flow, Flow over Plates, Cylinders and Spheres. Internal
Flow, Laminar and Turbulent Flow, Combined Laminar and Turbulent, Flow over Bank of tubes.
Free Convection: Dimensional Analysis, Flow over Vertical Plate, Horizontal Plate, Inclined Plate, Cylinders
and Spheres.
[T1, T2, T3]

UNIT – III
Condensation and Boiling: Film-wise condensation on vertical plate and horizontal tubes. Condensation inside
tubes, Regimes of Pool boiling. Calculations on Nucleate boiling, Critical Heat flux and Film boiling,
correlations in boiling and condensation.
Types of Heat Exchangers, Heat Exchanger Analysis, LMTD Method and NTU-Effectiveness method. Overall
Heat Transfer Coefficient, Fouling Factors.
[T1, T2, T3]

UNIT – IV
Radiation: Basic Concepts, Laws of Radiation, Stefan Boltzman Law, Kirchoffs Law, Black Body Radiation,
Grey body radiation, Radiation exchange between surfaces, Shape Factor Algebra, Hottel’s method for
estimating shape factor, Electrical Analogy, Radiation Shields, Radiation from gases and vapours, Solar
Radiation, Effect of radiation on temperature measurement.
[T1, T2, T3]


Text Books:
[T1] R.C. Sachdeva
      “Heat Transfers”
       McGraw Hill
[T2] Incropera, Dewitt
      “Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer”
[T3] P.K. Nag
      “Heat and Mass Transfer”
       McGraw Hill

Reference:
[R1] Holman, J.P.
      "Heat Transfer"
       Tata McGraw Hill Book Company
[R2] Kothandaraman C.P.
      “Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer”
       New Age International Publisher
[R3] Domkundwar S., Arora S.C., Domkundwar Anand V.
      “A course in Heat and Mass Transfer”
       Dhanpat Rai & Company
[R4] Rathore Mahesh M.
      “Engineering Heat and Mass Transfer”
       University Science Press
[R5] Ozisik M.N.
      “Heat Transfer”
       McGraw-Hill Book Co