Paper Code –ETCH-161
Paper : Applied Chemistry Lab


LIST OF EXPERIMENTS


1. Determination of alkalinity of water sample.

2. Determination of hardness of water sample by EDTA method.

3. Determine percentage composition of sodium hydroxide in the given mixture of sodium hydroxide and sodium chloride.

4. Determine amount of oxalic acid and Sulphuric acid in one litre of solution, given standard sodium hydroxide and Potassium Permanganate.

5. Determine amount of copper in the copper ore solution, provided hypo-solution(Iodometric Titration).

6. Determine amount of chloride ions present in water using silver nitrate(Mohr’s Precipitation Method).

7. Determine strength of MgSO4 solution by Complexometric titration.

8. Determine surface tension of a liquid using drop number method.

9. Determine viscosity of a given liquid(density to be determined).

10. Determine cell constant of conductivity cell and titration of strong acid/strong base conductometrically.

11. To determine
     (a) λ max of KMnO4 solution.
     (b) Verify Beer’s law and find out concentration of unknown solution by spectrophotometer.

12. Determination of concentration of iron in water sample by using spectrophotometer.

13. Determination of concentration of Iron(III) by complexometric titration.

14. Proximate analysis of coal.

15. Determination of eutectic point and congruent melting point for a 2-component system by method of cooling curve.


Suggested Books:
1. A.I. Vogel, G.H. Jeffery, Vogel’s Text Book of Quantitative Chemical Analysis
     Published by Longman Scientific & Technical, 5th Edition, 1989
2. S. Chawla
    Essentials of Experimental Engineering Chemistry
     Dhanpat Rai & Co, 3rd Edition, 2008
3. S. Rattan
    Experiments in Applied Chemistry
     Published by S.K.Kataria & Sons, 2nd Edition, 2003
4. O.P. Pandey, D.N. Bajpai and S. Giri
    Practical Chemistry
     Published by S. Chand, 2005
5. M.S. Kaurav
   Engineering Chemistry with Laboratory Experiments
    Published by PHI Learning Private Limited, 2011
6. S.K. Bhasin and Sudha Rani
    Laboratory Manual on Engineering Chemistry
     Published by Dhanpat Rai Publishing Company, 2006