Paper Code: ETEE- 202
Paper: Electrical Machines−II


Unit I: Poly phase Induction Machines
Constructional features, production of rotating magnetic field, working of 3-phase Induction motor, phasor
diagram, equivalent circuit, power and torque relations, torque and slip relations, no load and blocked rotor tests
and efficiency. speed control by rotor resistance, injected e.m.f, frequency variation and pole changing, DOL, Y-
Δ and autotransformer starters, deep bar and double cage rotor motors, cogging and crawling, operation of
Induction machine as generator and phasor diagram.
[T1,T2]

Unit II: Synchronous Alternators
Constructional features, armature windings, E.M.F. equation, winding coefficients, harmonics in the induced
E.M.F., armature reaction, O.C. and S.C. tests, voltage regulation-Synchronous impedance method, MMF
Method, Potier’s triangle method parallel operation, operation on infinite bus, cooling. Two reaction theory,
power expressions for cylindrical and salient pole machines, performance characteristics.
[T1,T2]

Unit III :Synchronous Motors
Synchronous Motor – Principle of operation, starting methods, phasor diagram torque-angle characteristics,
V-curves hunting and damping, synchronous condenser, introduction to single phase synchronous motors:
Reluctance and Hysteresis motors.
[T1,T2]

Unit IV: Fractional Horse Power Motors
Single Phase Induction Motor: Double revolving field theory, equivalent circuit, no load and blocked rotor tests,
starting methods, split phase Induction motor- capacitor start, two value capacitor motor.
Introduction and applications of single phase AC series motor, universal motor, AC servo motor, stepper motor,
permanent magnet AC motors.
[T1,T2]


Text Books:
[T1] A Fitzgeral, Charles Kingsley, Stephen Umans, “Electric Machinery”, Tata McGraw Hill Education, 6th Edition, 2002
[T2] I J Nagrath D P Kothari, “Electric Machines”, McGraw-Hill Education, 3rd edition, 2011.

Reference Books:
[R1] The Performance and Design of Alternating Current Machines, M.G. Say, CBS Publishers, 2005
[R2] Direct and Alternating Current Machinery, Jack Rosenblatt, CBS Publishers,2nd edition, 2001
[R3] Fractional and Sub fractional Horse-power Electric Motors, Cyril G. Veinott, Joseph E. Martin, McGraw Hill.
[R4] Problems in Electrical Engineering: Power engineering and electronics with answers Partly Solved in S.I. Units: Parker Smith, CBS Publishers, 9th edition, 2003
[R5] Electrical Machines with MATLAB, Turan Gӧnen, CRC Press,Taylor&Francis, 2nd edition, 1998.
[R6] Samarjit Ghosh, “Electrical Machines”, Pearson