Paper Code: ETEE-252 L T/P C
Paper: Electrical Machines−II Lab 0 2 1
List of Experiments
EXP. 1 To conduct no-load and blocked rotor test on three phase squirrel cage Induction motor and draw the
equivalent circuit.
EXP: 2 To conduct the load test on three phase squirrel cage Induction motor
(a) Compute torque, output power, efficiency, input power factor and slip for various load settings.
(b) To plot the following curves on the same graph sheet from the data obtained in part (a)
(1) Efficiency vs. output power.
(2) Torque vs. output power.
(3) Line current vs. output power.
(4) Power factor vs. output power.
(5) Slip vs. output power.
(c) Also plot Torque-slip characteristic.
EXP: 3 To conduct the load test on three phase slip ring Induction motor
(a) Compute torque, output power, efficiency, input power factor and slip for various load settings.
(b) To plot the following curves on the same graph sheet from the data obtained in part (a)
(1) Efficiency vs. output power.
(2) Torque vs. output power.
(3) Line current vs. output power.
(4) Power factor vs. output power.
(5) Slip vs. output power.
(c) Also plot Torque-slip characteristic.
EXP: 4 To study the different methods available in laboratory for of starting three-phase Induction motor and
compare them.
EXP: 5 To find the effect of the variation of supply voltage on the performance of three-phase Induction motor at
120%, 100%, 80%, 60%, and 50% of rated voltage and plot the variation of power factor, speed,
current and input power for different voltages.
EXP: 6
a) Perform no load and short circuit test on a three-phase synchronous generator.
b) Measure the resistance of the stator windings
c) Find the voltage regulation at full load at (i) Unity power factor (ii) 0.85 power factor leading (iii) 0.85
power factor lagging by synchronous impendence method.
EXP: 7 To synchronize a three-phase synchronous generator with the infinite bus bar. (main supply)
EXP: 8 To start a synchronous motor and study the effect of variation of field current upon the stator current
and power factor, hence draw V and inverted V curves of the motor for ½ load, ¾th load and full load. Also draw
the unity power factor curve.
EXP: 9 To perform slip test on a 3 phase synchronous machine and find direct axix and quadrature axix
synchronous reactances (Xd, Xq).
EXP: 10 To study voltage build up in isolated Induction generator and find its load characteristics using suitable
terminal capacitor.
EXP: 11 To conduct no-load and blocked rotor test on single phase squirrel cage Induction motor and draw the
equivalent circuit.
Reference Books:
T1. Laboratory Operations for Rotating Electric Machinery and Transformer Technology, Donald V.
Richardson, Prentice Hall, 1980
T2. Electric Machinery Experiments: Laboratory Practices and Simulation Studies,
Sailendra Nath Bhadra, Alpha Science International Ltd, 2013