Paper Code: ETTE-212 L T/P C
Paper: Metrology and Quality Assurance 3 0 3
Objective: The objective of the paper is to facilitate the student with techniques being adopted in industry for
inspection and quality checks.
UNIT- I
Principles of measurement: Definition of Metrology, difference between precision and accuracy. Sources of
errors: Controllable and Random Errors, Effects of Environment and Temperature, Effects of support,
alignment errors, errors in measurement of a quality which is function of other variables. Introduction to
Coordinate Measuring Machine (CMM).
Length Standards: Line standards, end standards and wavelength standards, transfer from line standards to end
standards. Numerical based on line standards. Slip gauges – its use and care, methods of building different
heights using different sets of slip gauges.
Limits, fits and Tolerances: Different types of fits and methods to provide these fits. Numerical to calculate
the limits, fits and tolerances as per IS 919-1963. ISO system of limits and fits; Gauges and its types, limit
gauges – plug and ring gauges. Gauge Design – Taylor’s Principle, wear allowance on gauges. Different
methods of giving tolerances on gauges.
[T1, T2][ No. of Hrs. 12]
UNIT–II
Types of Inspection:-Inspection by Gauging: limit gauging, plug gauges, Ring gauges, position gauges
Inspection by Measurement: Direct measurement such as Vernier Caliper, Vernier Height gauge, Vernier
Depth gauge Outside Micrometer, Inside Micrometer, Depth Micrometer, Slip gauges (gauge blocks), length
bars , Bevel protractor etc. Indirect Measurement such as Mechanical, optical, & pneumatic comparators,
Angular Measurements- Sine bar, angle gauges, precision levels, Introduction to Autocollimator,
Interferometers, NPL Flatness Interferometer etc.
[T1, T2][ No. of Hrs. 11]
UNIT-III
Straightness and flatness: Feature inspection such as flatness, roundness, straightness, parallelism, etc. Surface
texture, different types of irregularities, Measurement of various surface roughness parameters. Tomlinson
surface meter, Taylor-Hobson talysurf.
Screw Thread Measurement: Error in threads, Measurement of elements of screw threads –major dia, minor
dia, pitch, flank angle and effective diameter. Various thread gauges.
Gear Measurement: Gear terminology, measurement of gear thickness, Gear tooth vernier caliper Parkinson
gear tester.
[T1, T2][ No. of Hrs. 11]
UNIT – IV
Introduction to Quality Assurance: Need of quality, Aspects of quality, Quality specification, Quality
function Shewhart’s control charts for variables: X bar and R charts, operating characteristics curves, producer’s
risk, consumer’s risk, Sampling inspection , single double and multiple sampling plan.
[T3][ No. of Hrs. 10]
Text Books:
[T1] R.K. Jain, “Engineering Metrology”, Khanna Publishers, Delhi
[T2] I.C. Gupta, “Engineering Metrology”, Dhanpat Rai Publications, Delhi
[T3] EL Grant & RS Leavenworth, “Statistical Quality Control”, McGraw Hill & Co, 1988.
Reference Books:
[R1] F.W. Galyer & C.R. Shotbolt, “Metrology for Engineers”, ELBS Edition
[R2] Beckwith, Buck, Lienhard, Mechanical Measurements, Pearson Education Asia.
[R3] Anand K Bewoor, Vinay A Kulkarni “Metrology and Measurement”, TMH