Paper Code: ETEN-308 L T/P C
Paper: Economics for Engineers 3 1 4
Objective: The objective of this course is to give the working engineer an overview of the economics principles
often employed in effective engineering decisions as related to the designing, planning and implementation of
successful environmental projects.
UNIT–I
Engineering economics and its definition, Nature and scope, Overview of Indian Financial Scenario.
Utility, Theory of demand, law of demand and its exceptions, Elasticity of demand, Law of supply and elasticity
of supply, Determination of equilibrium price under perfect competition.
Time value of money-Simple and Compound Interest, Cash Flow Diagram, Principle of Economic Equivalence
Evaluation of Engineering projects, Concept of Internal rate of return (IRR).
[T1, T2][No. of Hours: 11]
UNIT–II
Cost Concepts, Elements of costs, Preparation of cost sheet, Segregation of costs into Fixed and variable costs,
Break-even Analysis-Linear Approach.
Engineering Accounting, Manufacturing Cost, Manufacturing Cost Estimation, Preparing Financial Business
Cases, Profit and loss A/c Balance sheet.
Asset Depreciation and its Impact on Economic Analyses, Depreciation Policy, Straight line method and
declining balance method, Economic Justification of Asset Replacements.
[T1, T2][No. of Hours: 11]
UNIT – III
Types of business ownership: Private ownership- individual, Partnership, Joint stock companies, Co-operative
societies, State ownership-government departmental organization, Public corporations, Government companies,
Public Private Partnership (PPP) and its management.
Store keeping, Elements of Materials management and control polices.
Banking: Meaning and functions of commercial banks, Function of Reserve Bank of India.
[T1, T2][No. of Hours: 12]
UNIT – IV
Environmental Economics: Relevance of Environmental Economics, Economic development in India and its
implication on natural resources and environment, Economic efficiency and markets, the economics of
environmental quality, Framework of analysis, Cost Benefit Analysis, Cost criteria for environmental
evaluation, Decentralized policies, Command and Control strategies, Emission taxes and subsidies, Transferable
discharge permits, Environmental Kuznets Curve(EKC).
[T1, T2][No. of Hours: 11]
Text Books:
[T1] S.C. Sharma and T.R. Banga, “Industrial Organization and Engineering Economics”. Khanna Pub.
[T2] Riggs, Bedworth and Randhwa , “Engineering Economics”, McGraw Hill Education India.
Reference Books:
[R1] Roger Perman and others,”Natural resources and Environmental Economics“, 2nd Ed., Longman,
US,1996.
[R2] C. T. Horngreen, “Cost Accounting “, Pearson Education India.
[R3] R. R. Paul, “Money banking and International Trade”, Kalyani Publisher, New-Delhi.