Paper Code: ETEN-302
Paper: Environment System Optimization (General Elective)


UNIT–I
Introduction to Optimization:
  Engineering Applications of Optimization, Statement of an Optimization Problem, Design Constraints, Constraint Surface, Objective Function, Optimization Techniques, Single- Variable Optimization, Multivariable Optimization with no Constraints, Multivariable Optimization with Equality Constraints, Multivariable Optimization with Inequality Constraints, Convex Programming Problem.
[T1,T2]

UNIT–II
Linear Programming:
  Applications, Standard form, Pivotal Reduction, Simplex Algorithm, 2 Phases of the simplex Method, Primal-Dual Relations, Transportation Problem, Integer Linear Programming.
  Assignment Problem.
  Examples- reservoir for irrigation and power production, river water quality (including treated effluent component).
  Water supply and drainage network optimization- case study.
[T1,T2]

UNIT–III
Geometric Programming:
  Introduction, Polynomial, Unconstrained Minimization Problem, Constrained Minimization, Applications of Geometric Programming.
Dynamic Programming:
  Introduction, Multistage Decision Processes, Representation of a Multistage Decision Process, Concept of Sub-optimization and the principle of the Optimality, Computational Procedure in Dynamic Programming, Continuous Dynamic Programming, Design of a Minimum-Cost Drainage System.
  Water allocation problem, capacity expansion problem, reservoir operation, case study.
[T1,T2]

UNIT–IV
Nonlinear Programming:
  Unrestricted Search, Exhaustive Search, Dichotomous Search, Interval Halving Method, Golden Section Method, Interpolation Method, Quadratic Interpolation Method, Cubic Interpolation Method, Direct Root Method, Case studies in Environmental Engineering.
[T1,T2]

Text Books:
[T1] Douglas A.H.
      “Environmental System Optimization”
       John Wiley and Sons, New York
[T2] Vedula S. and Mujumdar P.P.
      “Water Resources Systems: Modeling Techniques and Analysis”
       TMH

Reference Books:
[R1] Rao S.S.
      “Engineering Optimization - Theory and Optimization”
       New Age International Publishers
[R2] Haith D.A.
      “Environmental System Optimization”
       Wiley and Sons, New York
[R3] Geem Z.W.
      “Optimization In Civil and Environmental Engineering”
       Old City Publishing, USA
[R4] Sieniutycz S and Jezowski J.
      “Energy Optimization In Process Systems”
       Elsevier, UK
[R5] Floudas A and Perdolas M.
      “Encyclopedia of Optimization - Volume 2”
       Springer, USA