Paper Code: ETCE-308
Paper: Open Channel, Flow and Numerical Hydraulics


UNIT I
Flow in open channels:
  Type of channels, classification of flows, continuity energy and momentum equation, concept of critical depth and specific energy, critical depth for rectangular, triangular, circular and trapezoidal channels, flow through transition with a hump and with change in width (contraction and expansion).
Uniform flow:
  Chezy’s equation, Manning’s formula, Factors affecting Manning’s roughness coefficient, velocity distribution, shear stress distribution, Uniform flow computations for rectangular, trapezoidal and circular channels, standard line canal channels, Hydraulically efficient channel sections, compound sections, Critical slope and limit slope, Design of irrigation canals.
[T1,R1]

UNIT II
Gradually Varied Flow:
  Classification of flow profiles, M, S, C, H and A profiles, control sections, serial combination of channel sections, Transitional depth, numerical solution of gradually varied flow problems.
Hydraulic jump:
  Hydraulic jump in rectangular channel: sequent depth ratio, Energy loss.
  Classification of jumps, characteristics of jumps in rectangular channels, use of jump as an energy dissipater.
[T2,R1]

UNIT III
Sediment Transport:
  Hydraulics of mobile bed channels, sediment load, bed load, suspended load, Design of stable channels carrying clear water using Critical Tractive Force Approach, Regime channels, Kennedy equation and Lacey’s equations, Lining of irrigation canals, Design of lined irrigation canals.
[T2,R3]

UNIT IV
The finite volume Method for Diffusion Problems:
  Introduction, 1-D steady state diffusion, twodimentional diffusion problems, discretised equations for diffusion problems.
The Finite volume Method for Convection-Diffusion Problems:
  Steady one-dimensional convection and diffusion, central differencing scheme.
Basic mechanisms for mixing:
  Laminar and turbulent diffusion, Dispersion and advection.
  Mixing in rivers, lakes and coastal waters.
The general transport (advection-diffusion) equation:
  Formulation and special cases, Transport processes and spreading of pollutant.
  Balance equations for water and pollutants in surface water systems.
[T1,T2]


Text Books:
[T1] K. Subramanya
      “Flow in Open Channels”
       Tata McGraw Hill
[T2] G.L. Aswa
      “Fluid flow in pipes and Open Channel”
       CBS Publication

References:
[R1] Chow, V.T.
      “Open Channel Hydraulics”
       McGraw Hill Book Company 1959
[R2] Asawa, G.L.
      “Flow of Fluids in Pipes and Channels”
       CBS Publishers, New Delhi 2007
[R3] H.K. Versteeg and W. Malalasekera
      “An Introduction To Computational Fluid Dynamics: The Finite Volume Method”
       Longman Scientific and Technical Publishers
[R4] John D. Anderson
      “Computational Fluid Dynamics: The Basics with an Applications”
       McGraw Hill
[R5] Vivek V. Ranade
      Computational Flow Modeling For Chemical Reactor Engineering
       Academic Press, San Diego