Paper Code: ETEN-306 L T/P C
Paper: Industrial Waste Management 3 0 3


UNIT I
Standards for disposal of treated industrial wastewaters into water bodies, municipal sewer and land, Standards
for disposal of industrial solid wastes and gaseous emission from various industries and treatment systems such
as incinerator etc.
Industrial waste generation (solid and liquid waste and gaseous emission) and their characteristics, variation in
its quality and quantity, Estimation of capacity of equalization tank.
Industry specific physico-chemical and biological treatment requirements, alternatives and their evaluation in
respect of treatment.
[T1, T2]

UNIT II
Waste streams (solid, liquid and gaseous), their characteristics and manufacturing processes of integrated steel
plant, sponge iron unit, alumina/aluminum manufacturing unit, copper smelter, fertilizer plant, thermal power
plant, distillery/brewery, paper/pulp industry, tannery, textile unit and oil refinery. Case Studies.
[T1, T2]

UNIT III
Methods of waste reduction such as process modification, volume and strength reduction, segregation, reuse,
recycle, material conservation, good housekeeping. Neutralization, equalization, precipitation and solidification.
Economic feasibility of joint treatment of raw industrial effluent with municipal sewage. Need assessment and
design of common effluent treatment plant for industrial estates.
Planning and management of industrial wastes (solid, liquid and gaseous) from small scale industries.
[T1, T2]

UNIT IV
Selection of unit operations and their design for treatment and management of wastes (solid, liquid and gaseous)
from integrated steel plant, sponge iron unit, alumina/aluminum manufacturing unit, copper smelter, fertilizer
plant, thermal power plant, distillery/brewery, paper/pulp industry, tannery, textile unit and oil refinery. Case
Studies.
[T1, T2]

Text Books:
[T1] WesleyW., Eckenfelder Jr.,” Industrial Water Pollution Control ”, Tata McGraw Hill
[T2] Mahajan S.P., “Pollution Control in Process Industries”, Tata McGraw Hill Education (P) Ltd.
Reference Books:
[R1] Nemerow N.L and Agardy F.J., “Strategies of Industrial and Hazardous Waste Management”, International Thomson Publishing Company, NewYork.
[R2] Crites R.W., Reed S.C. and Bastion R., “Land Treatment Systems for Municipal and Industrial
Wastes”, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd., New Delhi.
[R3] Ostler, N.K., “Industrial Waste Steam Generation”, PHI Learning (P) Ltd., New Delhi.