Paper Code: ETEN-304 L T/P C
Paper: Principles of Solid Waste Management 3 0 3


UNIT – I
Sources, Composition and Properties of Municipal solid waste.
Life cycle analysis of waste. Need for solid waste management, integrated solid waste management (SWM)
System, Hierarchical approach for SWM. Segregation, reuse and recycling of solid waste, storage.
[T1, T2]

UNIT – II
Methods of treatment of solid waste - Incineration, Pyrolysis and Gasification Systems. Types and design of
Incinerators, Composting: Theory of composting, Manual and mechanized composting, Design of composting
plan.
Solid Waste Collection and Transportation: Types of collection systems (Hauled- container system and
Stationary container system), Collection routes and their Layout, Solid waste transfer stations.
[T1, T2]

UNIT – III
Characteristics and quantities of sludges from various unit operations, Sludge treatment flow diagrams,
Stabilization, Anaerobic sludge digestion, Aerobic sludge digestion, Composting, Conditioning, Dewatering,
Thermal reduction, Land application of sludge.
Landfills: Classification, Types and methods, Site selection, Site preparation, Composition, Characteristics,
Generation, and Control of Landfill gases; Composition, Formation, Movement and control of lechate in
landfills; landfill design. Revegetation of closed landfill sites, Long term post closure plan, Groundwater
monitoring during and after closure.
[T1, T2]

UNIT – IV
Remedial actions for abundant waste disposal sites, Waste to energy- Heat value of refused, combustion and
energy recovery, energy production from waste, material and thermal balances, other technologies. Case
Studies, Health and safety issues, Monitoring Requirements in respect of Dioxins, furans, NOx, Environmental
Issues, Solid waste and livelihood.
[T1, T2]


Text Books:
[T1] CPHEEO, “Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management”, Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi
[T2] Tchobanoglous G., Theisen H., Viquel S.A., “Integrated Solid Waste Management: Engineering, Principles and Management issues”, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd., New Delhi

Reference Books:
[R1] Peavy H.S., Rowe D.R., Tchobanoglous G., “Environmental Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill
[R2] Cunningham W.P., Cunningham M.A., “Principles of Environmental Science”, Tata McGraw Hill
[R3] Krishnamoorthy B., “Environmental Management, Text Book and Cases”, PHI Learning (P) Ltd
[R4] Chandrappa R., Das D.B., “Solid Waste Management: Principals and Practice”
[R5] Davis M.L., Cornwell D.A., “Introduction to Environmental Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill