Paper Code: ETCS-354
Paper: Computer Networks


List of Experiments:


1. Introduction to Computer Network laboratory
   Introduction to Discrete Event Simulation
   Discrete Event Simulation Tools - ns2/ns3, Omnet++

2. Using Free Open Source Software tools for network simulation – I:
   Preliminary usage of the tool ns3
   Simulate telnet and ftp between N sources - N sinks (N = 1, 2, 3).
   Evaluate the effect of increasing data rate on congestion.

3. Using Free Open Source Software tools for network simulation - II:
   Advanced usage of the tool ns3
   Simulating the effect of queueing disciplines on network performance - Random Early
   Detection/Weighted RED / Adaptive RED (This can be used as a lead up to DiffServ / IntServ later).

4. Using Free Open Source Software tools for network simulation - III:
   Advanced usage of the tool ns3 Simulate http, ftp and DBMS access in networks

5. Using Free Open Source Software tools for network simulation - IV:
   Advanced usage of the tool ns3
   Effect of VLAN on network performance - multiple VLANs and single router.

6. Using Free Open Source Software tools for network simulation - V:
   Advanced usage of the tool ns3
   Effect of VLAN on network performance - multiple VLANs with separate multiple routers.

7. Using Free Open Source Software tools for network simulation - VI:
   Advanced usage of the tool ns3
   Simulating the effect of DiffServ / IntServ in routers on throughput enhancement.

8. Using Free Open Source Software tools for network simulation - VII:
   Advanced usage of the tool ns3
   Simulating the performance of wireless networks

9. Case Study I : Evaluating the effect of Network Components on Network Performance
   To Design and Implement LAN With Various Topologies and To Evaluate Network Performance Parameters for DBMS etc

10. Case Study II : Evaluating the effect of Network Components on Network Performance
    To Design & Implement LAN Using Switch/Hub/Router As Interconnecting Devices For 2 Different LANs and To Evaluate Network Performance Parameters.

11. Mini project - one experiment to be styled as a project of duration 1 month (the last month)