Paper Code: ETME-408 L T/P C
Paper: Nuclear Power Generation and Supply 2 1 3


UNIT- I:
Introduction: Systems in nuclear reactor- Reactor fuels: Natural and enriched fuels, sources, merits and demerits
of different fuels for reactor use, fabrication, handling of fuels and irradiated fuels, fuel management, storage,
reprocessing of irradiated fuels. Reactor shutdown systems: Materials for reactor control and choices, liquid vs.
solid shut down systems, design aspect- fall safe features, loading consideration, actuation methodology. Primary
heat transport (cooling) system: Heat generation and distribution, Coolant characteristics, Selection of coolants,
Coolant Circuit, Core thermal hydraulics, design aspects, radioactivity generation. Decay heat removal system:
Functional requirements, cooling circuits, Design aspects, Loading considerations, Passive features.
[T1, T2, R1, R2]

UNIT- II:
Reactor structure: Core composition, Reflector, Reactor vessel, Safety vessel, Shielding. Thermal, biological,
Shield cooling system, Neutron flux monitoring and control, instrumentations. Moderator system: Materials,
Selection, Design consideration, Circuit, Radioactivity aspects. Cover gas system: Purpose, Selection of material,
Design considerations, Circuit. Reactor regulating system: Purpose, Methodology, Design considerations,
Actuating mechanism. Auxiliary cooling circuit: Functions, Design considerations, cooling circuit. Containment
and ventilation system: Functions, Types, Arrangement, Design considerations, loading, Testing.
[T1, T2, R1, R2]

UNIT- III:
Reactor Design: Principles, Safety classifications, Seismic quality group, Loading considerations under normal
operations, anticipated operational occurrences, design basis accidents such as earthquake, loss of coolant accident
(LOCA),blackout, flood, missiles, operator error, duel failures as applicable, Safety features for server accidents,
standards, soft ware, verifications etc.
Nuclear power plants: Types .Thermal reactors: BWR, PWR, PHWR, GCR, APWR, AHWR etc. Fast reactors
Breeders; Fusion power; Off-land NPPs:- space power unit, nuclear ships, submarines. Economics of NPPs:
Various costs, ROI, Sizing, Operational characteristics.
[T1, T2, R1, R2]

UNIT- IV :
Radiation protection and Radioactive Waste Management: Radiation hazard, Exposures, Exposure pathways,
dose unit, measurement, and radiation protection. CRP and other guidance document etc. Radioactive Waste
Management: Waste categorization, Generation, Handling of wastes, Liquid, gaseous and solid, Short term / long
term storage / disposed.
Reactor Stages and Safety Assurances- Nuclear safety assurance.
[T1, T2, R1, R2]


Text Books:
[T1] P.K. Nag. Nuclear Power Plant, Power Plant Engg. (Steam & Nuclear)
[T2] A.K. Raja, A.P. Srivastava & M. Dwivedi, An Introduction on Nuclear Engineering

Reference Books:
[R1] Glasstone & Sesons- Nuclear Engineering
[R2] Arora & Domkundwar, A course in Power Plant Engg