Paper Code: ETME 110
Paper: Engineering Mechanics


UNIT- I
Force system:
 Free body diagram, Parallel force system, concurrent force system, Equilibrium equations and applications in different force systems.
Friction:
 Static and Kinetic friction, laws of dry friction, co-efficient of friction, angle of friction, angle of repose, cone of friction, Belt drive- derivation of equation T1/T2 = e and its application, M.A, V.R and Efficiency of Screw Jack, Application of friction in pivot and collar bearing..
[T1,T2,R1,R2,R4,R5]

UNIT- II
Structure:
 Plane truss, perfect and imperfect truss, assumption in truss analysis, analysis of perfect plane trusses by the method of joints, method of section, graphical method.
Distributed Force:
 Determination of center of gravity, center of mass and centroid by direct integration and by method of composite bodies, mass moment of inertia and area moment of inertia by direct integration and composite bodies method, radius of gyration, parallel axis theorem, Pappus theorems, polar moment of inertia.
[T1,T2,R1,R2,R4,R5]

Unit-III
Kinematics of Particles:
 Rectilinear motion, plane curvilinear motion-rectangular coordinates, normal and tangential component.
Kinetics of Particles:
 Equation of motion, rectilinear motion and curvilinear motion, work energy equation, conservation of energy, impulse and momentum, conservation of momentum, impact of bodies, co-efficient of restitution, loss of energy during impact.
[T1,T2,R1,R2,R4,R5]

Unit-IV
Kinematics of Rigid Bodies:
 Concept of rigid body, type of rigid body motion, absolute motion, introduction to relative velocity, instantaneous center of velocity, Velocity polygons for 4-bar mechanism and single slider mechanism.
Kinetics of Rigid Bodies:
 Equation of motion, translatory motion and fixed axis rotation, application of work energy principles to rigid bodies conservation of energy.
Shear force and bending Moment Diagram.
[T1,T2,R1,R2,R4,R5]


Text Books:
T1. Engg Mechanics by A.K.Tayal (Umesh Publications)
T2. Engg Mechanics by Basudeb Bhattacharya (Oxford university Press)

Reference Books:
R1. Engg Mechanics by Irving H. Shames (Pearson publications)
R2. Engg Mechanics by U.C.Jindal (Galgotia Publications)
R3. Engg Mechanics by Beer & Johnston (TMH)
R4. Engg Mechanics by K.L.Kumar (TMH)
R5. Engg Mechanics by Sadhu Singh (Khanna Publishers)