Paper Code: ETEN-114
Paper : Environmental Studies


UNIT I: Environmental Studies:
  Ecosystems, Bio-diversity and its Conservation
  (i) The Multidisciplinary Nature of Environmental Studies
      Definition, scope and importance of Environmental Studies.
      Biotic and a biotic component of environment, need for environmental awareness.
  (ii) Ecosystems
       Concept of ecosystem, structure and function of an ecosystem, producers, consumers and decomposers, energy flow in ecosystem, ecological succession, food chains, food webs and ecological pyramids.
       Introduction, types, characteristic features, structures and function of the following ecosystem:
         (a) Forest ecosystem
         (b) Grassland ecosystem
         (c) Desert ecosystem
         (d) Aquatic ecosystem (ponds, streams, lakes, rivers, oceans, estuaries).
  (iii) Bio-diversity and its Conservation
        Introduction to biodiversity —definition: genetic, species and ecosystem diversity, Bio-geographical classification of India.
        Value of biodiversity: Consumptive use, productive use, social, ethical, aesthetic and option values, Biodiversity at global, national and local levels, India as a mega-diversity nation, Hot-spots of biodiversity.
        Threats to biodiversity: Habitat loss, Poaching of wildlife, man-wildlife conflicts, rare, endangered and threatened species(RET) endemic species of India, method of biodiversity conservation.
        In-situ and ex-situ conservation.
[T1][R3]

UNIT II: Natural Resources: problems and prospects
  (i)  Renewable and Non-renewable Natural Resources:
       Concept and definition of Natural Resources and need for their management
  (ii) Forest resources:
       Use and over-exploitation, deforestation, case studies, timber extraction, mining, dams and their effects on forests and tribal people.
  (iii)Water resources:
       Use and over-utilization of surface and ground water, floods, drought, conflicts over water, dams-benefits and problems, Water conservation, rain water harvesting, watershed management.
  (iv) Mineral resources:
       Uses are exploitation, environmental effects of extracting and using mineral resources, case studies.
  (v)  Food resources:
       World food problems, changes causes by agriculture and over-grazing, effects of modern agriculture, fertilizer-pesticide problems, water logging, salinity, case studies.
  (vi) Energy resources:
       Growing energy needs, renewable and non-renewable energy sources, use of alternate energy sources, Urban problems related to energy, case studies.
  (vii)Land resources:
       Land as a resource, land degradation, man induced landslides, soil erosion and desertification.
[T1][R3]

UNIT III: Environmental Chemistry and Pollution Control
   (i) Chemistry of Environment
        (a) Green Technology
            Principles of Green technology, Zero Waste Technology, Green Chemistry & Its basic principles, Atom Economy, Green Methodologies. clean development mechanisms (CDM), concept of environmental impact assessment,
        (b) Eco-Friendly polymers
            Environmental degradation of polymers, Biodegradable, Photo-biodegradable polymers, Hydrolysis & Hydrobiodegradable, Biopolymers & Bioplastics: polylactic acid, polyhydroxybutyrate, polycaprolactone.
            Concept of bioremediation.
   (ii)Environmental Pollution
       Definition, types, causes, effects and control measures of:-
        (a) Air pollution
        (b) Water pollution
        (c) Soil pollution
        (d) Marine pollution
        (e) Noise pollution
        (f) Thermal pollution
        (g) Nuclear hazards.
       Pollution case studies.
       Solid waste and its management: causes, effects and control measures of urban and industrial waste.
       Chemical toxicology-Terms related to toxicity, impact of chemicals (Hg, As, Cd, Cr, Pb) on environment.
[T1][R3]

UNIT IV: Disaster Management, Social Issues, Human Population and the Environment
(i) Disaster Management
    Disaster management: floods, earthquake, cyclone and land-slides, nuclear accidents and holocaust, case studies.
(ii) Social Issues, Human Population and the Environment
     Sustainable development, Climate change, global warming, acid rain, ozone layer depletion.
     Environmental ethics: Issues and possible solutions, Consumerism and waste products, Wasteland reclamation.
     Population growth, problems of urbanisation.
     Environment Protection Act, 1986; Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981; Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; Wildlife Protection Act, 1972; Forest Conservation Act, 1980; Environmental management system standards-ISO 14000 series.
[T1]


Text Books:
[T1] E. Barucha
     Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
      Universities Press(India) Pvt Ltd, 2005
[T2] S. Chawla
     A Textbook of Environmental Studies
      McGraw-Hill Education Private Limited, 2012

References Books:
[R1] G.T. Miller
     Environmental Science
      Thomas Learning, 2012
[R2] W. Cunningham and M.A. Cunningham
     Principles of Environment Science: Enquiry and Applications
      Tata McGraw Hill Publication, N. Delhi, 2003.
[R3] R. Rajagopalan
     Environmental Studies: From Crisis to Cure, 2nd Edition
      Oxford University Press, 2011
[R4] A.K. De
     Environmental Chemistry
      New Age Int Publ 2012
[R5] A. Kaushik and C.P. Kaushik
     Perspectives in Environment Studies
      4th Edition, New Age International Publishers, 2013
[R6] Environmental Engineering by Gerard Kiely
      Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Ltd, New Delhi, 2010