Paper Code –ETEN-160
Paper : Environmental Studies Lab


LIST OF EXPERIMENTS


1. Determination of pH, conductivity and turbidity in drinking water sample

2. Determination of pH and conductivity of soil/sludge samples

3. Determination of moisture content of soil sample

4. Determination of Total Dissolved Solids(TDS) of water sample

5. Determination of Dissolved Oxygen(DO) in the water sample

6. Determination of Biological Oxygen Demand(BOD) in the water sample

7. Determination of Chemical Oxygen Demand(COD) in the water sample

8. Determination of Residual Chlorine in the water sample

9. Determination of Ammonia in the water sample

10. Determination of Carbon Dioxide in the water sample

11. Determination of Nitrate/Sulphate ions in water using spectrophotometer

12. Determination of the molecular weight of polystyrene sample using viscometer method

13. Base catalyzed aldol condensation by Green Methodology

14. Acetylation of primary amines using eco-friendly method

15. To determine the concentration of particulate matter in the ambient air using High Volume Sampler


P.S.: For better understanding of various aspects of environment visits to local areas, depending upon easy access and importance may be planned to any nearby river, forest, grassland, hills and students should write a report based on their observations.


Suggested Books:
1. A.I. Vogel, G. H. Jeffery, Vogel’s Text Book of Quantitative Chemical Analysis
     Published by Longman Scientific & Technical, 5th Edition, 1989
2. dst.gov.in/green-chem.pdf
    (monograph of green chemistry laboratory experiments)
3. S. Chawla
    Essentials of Experimental Engineering Chemistry, 3rd Edition
     Dhanpat Rai & Co, 2008
4. S. Rattan
    Experiments in Applied Chemistry, 2nd Edition
     Published by S.K. Kataria & Sons, 2003
5. W. Cunningham and M.A. Cunningham
    Principles of Environment Science: Enquiry and Applications
     Tata McGraw Hill Publication, New Delhi, 2003
6. A. Kaushik and C. P. Kaushik
    Perspectives in Environment Studies, 4th Edition
      New Age International Publishers, 2013