Paper Code: ETEE-312 L T/P C
Paper: Power Station Practice 3 1 4


UNIT I
Different form energy sources:
  Fossils fuels, Nuclear energy and Hydro power,-Renewable Energy Sources:
Introduction to Solar energy, geo-thermal energy, tidal energy, wind energy, bio-gas energy and M.H.D. Power
generation.
 Thermal Power Plant: Location and Site selection, general layout and working of plant, boilers,
economizers, super heaters, draft equipments, fuel and ash handling plants.
[T1,T2]

UNIT II
Gas Turbine Power Plant: Lay out, Working and components of gas turbine power plant, combined gas and
steam turbine plant.
Hydro Electric Plant: Location and site selection, general layout and operation of plant, Types of Hydro
Turbines and their characteristics – Impulse and reaction type (Pelton Wheel, Francis and Kaplan turbines,),
speed governing system. Diesel Power Plant: Layout and components of plant auxiliary equipments.
[T1,T2]

UNIT III
Nuclear Power Plant: Location and site selection, general layout and operation of plant, brief description of
reactors, moderators and reflectors.
Economic Operation Of Power System: Performance curves, Economic generation scheduling neglecting
losses and generator limits, Economic generation scheduling Economic Dispatch including transmission losses –
approximate penalty factor, iterative technique for solution of economic dispatch with losses; Derivation of
transmission loss formula.
[T1,T2]

UNIT IV
Substation Layout: Types of substations, typical layout and constructional details of pole mounted, Indoor,
Outdoor sub-stations, hybrid gas insulated sub stations, bus bar arrangements, application of substation
equipment like transformer , circuit breaker, isolator, metering equipments and protecting equipment , substation
grounding.
[T1,T2]


Text Books:
[T1] M.V. Deshpande, “Elements of Electric Power Station Design”, Wheeler Publishing Co
[T2] B.G.A. Skrotzki & W.A. Vopat
      “Power Station Engineering and Economy”, 5th edition
      Tata McGraw Hill, 2013
[T3] Harish. C. Rai
      “Power Plant Engineering”
       I.K. International Publishers

Reference Books:
[R1] S.L. Uppal, “Electrical Power”, Khanna Publishers. 13th edition 2003
[R2] M.L. Soni, P.V. Gupta and U.S. Bhatnagar, “A Course in Electrical Power”, Dhanpat Rai & Sons, 1st edition 2005
[R3] B.R. Gupta, “Generation of Electrical Energy”, Eurasa Publishing House
[R4] C.L. Wadhva, “Generation distribution and utilization Electrical Engg.”