Paper Code: ETEE-417 L T/P C
Paper: High Voltage Engineering 3 0 3


UNIT I
High Voltage and Breakdown Phenomenon
Electric field stress due to high voltage, gas ,vacuum, liquid, solids and composites as dielectrics and insulator,
estimation and control of electric stress and numerical methods for its computation, surge voltages and their
distribution and control, application of insulating materials in transformer, rotating machines, circuit breakers,
cable, power capacitors, bushings; breakdown in gaseous and liquid dielectrics, collision process, ionization
process, Townsend’s Criteria of breakdown in gases, Paschen’s law, breakdown in pure and commercial liquids
as insulator; intrinsic, electromechanical and thermal breakdown of solid dielectrics, breakdown in composite
dielectrics.
[T1]

UNIT II
Generation of High Voltages and Currents
Generation of high direct current voltages and high alternating current voltages, generation of impulse voltages
and impulse currents, tripping and control of impulse generators.
[T2]

UNIT III
Measurement of High Voltages and Currents
Measurements of high voltages - direct, alternating and impulse, measurements of high currents–direct,
alternating and impulse, Oscilloscope for impulse voltage and current measurements.
[T1]

UNIT IV
Over Voltage, Insulation Coordination and Testing
Causes of over voltage – lightning, switching, faults and other abnormal conditions, principles of insulation
coordination in high voltage, extra high voltage and ultra high voltage power systems, measurement of DC
resistivity, dielectric constant, loss factor and partial discharge, testing of insulators and bushings, isolators and
circuit breakers, cables, transformers, surge arresters, measurement of Radio Interference.
[T1,T2]

Text Books:-
[T1] M. S. Naidu & V. Kamaraju , “High Voltage Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill Publications, 3rd Edition
[T2] E. Kuffel, W.S. Zaengl & J. Kuffel , “High Voltage Engineering – Fundamentals”, Elsevier, 2nd Edition

Reference Books:
[R1] C. L. Wadhwa, “High Voltage Engineering”, New Age International (P) Ltd, 1997.
[R2] Ravindra Arora & Wolfgang Mosh, “High Voltage Insulation Engineering”, New Age International (P) Ltd, 1995.