Paper Code: ETEC-429 L T/P C
Paper: Selected Topics in ECE 3 0 3
Objective: The objective of this course is to familiarize the selected vital topics of the electronics and
communication engineering.
UNIT I
Introduction to the Verilog Hardware Description Language (HDL), Verilog system design , Module testing,
Behaviour Modelling, Tasks and functions, Verilog structure, syntax and semantics, Identifier names, logic
values and numbers, data types. Gate level modeling, Generating arrays of instances • Generating arrays of
instances Dataflow modelling, Reset function design. Design of digital sequential modules. Examples - Bus
design.
[T1,R2][No. of Hrs. 10]
UNIT II
Introduction to System Verilog, System Verilog extensions to Verilog data types, System Verilog enhanced
procedural blocks, System Verilog coding styles for top-down design with synthesis and simulation. Blocking
and non-blocking assignments affect, simulation and synthesis. Overview of RTL/gate/switch models. Writing
verification test benches in Verilog. System verilog interfaces. Using interfaces to simplify inter-module
connections, Specifying interface views (modports), using tasks and functions in interfaces
[T1,R2][No. of Hrs. 10]
UNIT III
Introduction to Smart Antenna Systems, Concept and benefits of smart antennas, Fixed weight beam forming
basics, Detection and estimation of arrival angle, Adaptive beam forming. Tx-Rx Array processing. Spatial
processing for wireless systems. Adaptive antennas. Beam forming networks. Digital radio receiver techniques
and software radios. Coherent and non-coherent CDMA spatial processors. Dynamic re-sectoring. Range and
capacity extension – multi-cell systems. Spatio – temporal channel models. Environment and signal parameters.
Geometrically based single bounce elliptical model.
[T2,R1][No. of Hrs. 10]
UNIT IV
Optimal Spatial filtering – adaptive algorithms for CDMA. Multitarget decision – directed algorithm. DOA
estimation – conventional and subspace methods. ML estimation techniques. Estimation of the number of
sources using eigen decomposition. Direction finding and true ranging PL systems. Elliptic and hyperbolic PL
systems. TDOA estimation techniques. Applications of Smart Antennas in Wireless/Mobile Communications
Applications, Smart Antenna Techniques for CDMA (including current applications).
[T2,R1][No. of Hrs. 10]
Textbook:
[T1] SystemVerilog for Verification by Ben Cohen, Srinivasan Venkataramanan, Ajeetha Kumari
[T2] T.S.Rappaport & J.C.Liberti, Smart Antennas for Wireless Communication, Prentice Hall (PTR), 1999.
Reference Books:
[R1] R.Janaswamy, Radio Wave Propagation and Smart Antennas for Wireless Communication, Kluwer,
2001.
[R2] Verilog HDL: A Guide to Digital Design and Synthesis, by Samir Palnitkar Prentice Hall Professional,
2003