Paper Code: ETHS-301
Paper: Communication Skills for Professionals


UNIT I
Organizational Communication:
  Meaning, importance and function of communication, Process of communication.
  Communication Cycle - message, sender, encoding, channel, receiver, decoding, feedback.
  Characteristics, Media and Types of communication.
  Formal and informal channels of communication.
  7 C’s of communication.
  Barriers to communication.
  Ethics of communication (plagiarism, language sensitivity).
Soft Skills:
  Personality Development, Self Analysis through SWOT, Johari Window, Interpersonal skills - Time management, Team building, Leadership skills.
  Emotional Intelligence.
  Self Development and Assessment - Self assessment, Awareness, Perception and Attitudes, Values and belief, Personal goal setting, Career planning, Self esteem.
[T1,T2]

UNIT II
Introduction to Phonetics:
  IPA system (as in Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary).
  Speech Mechanism, Description of Speech Sounds, Phoneme, Diphthong, Syllable, Stress, Intonation, Prosodic Features, Pronunciation.
  Phonetic Transcription - Conversion of words to phonetic symbols and from phonetic symbols to words.
  British & American English (basic difference in vocabulary, spelling, pronunciation, structure).
Non-Verbal Language:
  Importance, characteristics, types – Paralanguage (voice, tone, volume, speed, pitch, effective pause), Body Language (posture, gesture, eye contact, facial expressions), Proxemics, Chronemics, Appearance, Symbols.
[T1,T2]

UNIT III
Letters at the Workplace –- letter writing (hard copy and soft copy): request, sales, enquiry, order, complaint.
Job Application -- resume and cover letter.
Meeting Documentation -- notice, memo, circular, agenda and minutes of meeting.
Report Writing -- Significance, purpose, characteristics, types of reports, planning, organizing and writing a report, structure of formal report.
Writing an abstract, summary, Basics of formatting and style sheet (IEEE Editorial Style Manual), development of thesis argument, data collection, inside citations, bibliography.
Preparing a written report for presentation and submission.
Writing a paper for conference presentation/journal submission.
[T1,T2]

UNIT IV
Listening and Speaking Skills:
  Importance, purpose and types of listening, process of listening, difference between hearing and listening, Barriers to effective listening, Traits of a good listener, Tips for effective listening.
  Analytical thinking.
  Speech, Rhetoric, Polemics.
  Audience analysis.
  Telephone Skills - making and receiving calls, leaving a message, asking and giving information, etiquettes.
Presentations:
  Mode, mean and purpose of presentation, organizing the contents, nuances of delivery, voice & body language in effective presentation, time dimension.
Group Discussion:
  Purpose, types of GDs, strategies for GDs, body language and guidelines for group discussion.
Interview Skills:
  Purpose, types of interviews, preparing for the interview, attending the interview, interview process, employers expectations, general etiquettes.
[T1,T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Anna Dept. Of English
     Mindscapes: English for Technologists & Engineers
      PB, New Delhi: Orient Blackswan
[T2] Farhathullah, T. M.
      Communication Skills for Technical Students
       Orient Blackswan, 2002

References Books:
[R1] Masters, Ann and Harold R. Wallace
      Personal Development for Life and Work, 10th Edition
       Cengage Learning India, 2012
[R2] Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
      IEEE Editorial Style Manual
       IEEE, n.d. Web. 9 Sept. 2009
[R3] Sethi and Dhamija
      A Course in Phonetics and Spoken English
       PHI Learning, 1999
[R4] Khera, Shiv
      You Can Win
       New York: Macmillan, 2003