Paper Code: ETEN-303 L T/P C
Paper: Biochemical Processes in Wastewater Treatment 3 1 4


UNIT – I
Estimating wastewater flow rates, Physical, Chemical and biological characteristics of wastewater, Reactor
types, Flow regimes, Application of Material Balance equations for batch, complete mix and plug flow reactor.
Introduction to industrial effluent disposal, Wastewater treatment, sludge disposal and reuse, Classification of
wastewater treatment methods. Selection of Treatment-process, flow diagrams, Evaluation and selection of
design flow rates, Evaluation and selection of design mass loadings. Process selection, elements of conceptual
process design.
[T1,T2]

UNIT – II
Design of facilities for the biological treatment of wastewater: Activated sludge process, Selection and design of
physical facilities for activated sludge process, Activated sludge process design, Aerated lagoons, Trickling
filters, Rotating biological contractors, Combined aerobic treatment processes, Stabilization ponds.
[T1,T2]

UNIT – III
Anaerobic processes of treatment, single stage and two stage digestion, upflow anaerobic sludge blanket
(UASB) system for treatment of sewage and industrial effluents.
Biological nutrient removal, Removal of nitrogen by biological nitrification/denitrification.
Removal of phosphorous by biological methods, Combined removal of nitrogen and phosphorus by biological
methods.
[T1,T2]

UNIT – IV
Aerobic suspended-growth treatment processes, Aerobic attached - growth treatment processes, Anaerobic
suspended - growth treatment processes, anaerobic attached-growth treatment processes, Pond treatment
processes.
[T1,T2]


Text:
[T1] Metcalf and Eddy, “Wastewater Engineering- Treatment and reuse,” Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd., New Delhi.
[T2] Davis M.L., Cornwell D.A., “Introduction to Environmental Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill Education (P) Ltd., New Delhi.

Reference Books:
[R1] Droste R.L., “Theory and Practice of Water and Wastewater Treatment”, Wiley India (P) Ltd.
[R2] Hammer M.J. and Hammer M.J., Jr., “Water and Wastewater Technology”, PHI (P) Ltd., New Delhi.
[R3] Benefield L.D. and Randall C.W., “ Biological Process Design for Waste water Treatment”, PHI Learning (P) Ltd., New Delhi.
[R4] CPHEEO Manual.
[R5] Peavy H.S., Rowe D.R., Tchobanoglous G., “Environmental Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill Education (P) Ltd., New Delhi.
[R6] Venkateswarlu K.S., “Water Chemistry, Industrial and Power Station Water Treatment, New Age International Publishers, New Delhi.