Paper Code: ETEN-309 L T/P C
Paper: Environmental Instrumentation 3 1 4


UNIT – I
Environmental analysis: Accuracy, Precision, Types of errors, Minimization of error, Significant figures,
Criteria for rejection of data. Signals and Data: Signal to Noise Ratio, Sensitivity and Detection limit,
Evaluation of results.
Absorption and Emission Spectroscopy: Electromagnetic Spectrum, Atomic, Molecular and Vibrational energy
Levels, Raman Effect, Lasers, Nuclear and Electron Spin behavior, X- ray energy levels.
[T1,T2]

UNIT – II
Ultraviolet and Visible Spectrometery:: Radiation sources, wavelength selection, sampling devices and
detectors, Instruments for absorption photometry, Fundamental laws of photometry, photometric accuracy and
precision.
Difference and derivative Spectroscopy, Photometric Titrations, Turbidimetry and Nephelometry.
Principle of Flame emission spectroscopy (FES) and Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS), Interferences
associated with flames and furnaces, Comparison of FES and AAS.
Principles of Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) Atomic Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Comparison of ICP and
AAS methods.
[T1,T2]

UNIT – III
Principles of NMR Spectroscopy, Elucidation of NMR Spectra.
Mass Spectroscopy (MS) : Ionization methods, Ion collection systems, Vacuum system, Isotope-ratio
Spectrometry, Correlation of Mass spectra with molecular structure. Interfacing with ICP with MS.
Chromatographic Methods: Classification, Principle of Gas Chromatography, Gas chromatographic columns,
liquid phases and column selection, detectors for GC, Gas-solid Chromatography, Interfacing GC with MS.
HPLC: Mobile phase Delivery System, Sample Introduction, Separation Columns, Detectors.
Ion Chromatography, Paper and Thin Layer Chromatography.
[T1,T2]

UNIT – IV
Automated analysis: Infrared Process Analyzers, Oxygen Analysers, Chemical Sensors, Continous online
process control, Automatic Chemical Analyzers and Automatic Elemental Analysers
Continuous Monitoring Instruments and their principles: NDIR for CO, Chemiluminescent analyzer for NOx,
Fluorescent analyzer for SO2, Instruments for Hydrocarbons and ozone monitoring, Automated wet chemical
analyzer for water quality.
[T1,T2]


Text Books :
[T1] Willard H.H., Meritt L.L., Dean J.A.,Settle F.A., “Instrumental Methods of Analysis”, CBS Publishers and Distributers (P) Ltd., New Delhi.
[T2] Sawyer C.N., McCarty P.L. and Parkin G.F., “Chemistry for Environmental Engineering and Science”, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd., New Delhi

Reference Books:
[R1] De A.K., “Environmental Chemistry ", New Age International (P) Ltd., New Delhi.
[R2] Sharma B.K.,”Analytical Chemistry”, Krishns Prakashan, Meerut.
[R3] Recsok R.L. and Shields L.D., “Modern Methods of Chemical Analysis”, Wiley India (P) Ltd.
[R4] Ewing G.W., “Instrumental Methods of Chemical Analysis”, Tata McGraw Hill