Paper Code: ETCE-419 L T/P C
Paper: Data Analytics 3 0 3
Objective: This course is aimed at providing in-depth understanding of data analysis based on statistical
techniques. The approach to data analysis involves exploratory methods, continuous distributions such as
normal, lognormal distribution, probability plotting for normal distributions, hypothesis testing etc. The subject
deals with model estimation and testing using para metric and non parametric methods, identification and
accommodation of outliers, frequency analysis of extreme events like flld, storms, droughts etc and use of
simulation techniques such as monte-carlo simulation.
UNIT – I
Preliminary Data Analysis: Graphical representation-line diagram or Bar Chart, Dot diagram, Histogram,
Exploratory methods- stem and leaf plot, Box plot. Random events- sample space and events, the null event,
Intersection and Union, Venn Diagram and Event space. Continuous Distributions- Normal Distribution,
Lognormal Distribution, Bivariate Normal Distribution.
[T1][No. of Hrs. 10]
UNIT – II
Model Estimation and Testing: Properties of Estimators- Unbiasedness, Consistency, Minimum Variance,
Efficiency, Sufficiency. Estimation of Confidence Intervals. Hypothesis testing- Procedure for testing,
Probabilities of Type I and Type II Errors and the power function, Tests of Hypothesis involving the Variance,
the F Distribution and its use. Nonparametric methods- Wilcoxon Signed- Rank Test for Association of Paired
Observations.
[T2][No. of Hrs. 12]
UNIT – III
Goodness of Fit Tests: Chi-squared Goodness of Fit test, Kolmogorov- Smirnov Goodness of Fit test,
Kolmogorov- Smirnov Two- sample test, Anderson- Darling Goodness of Fit test, Other methods for testing the
Goodness of Fit to a Normal Distribution.
Analysis of Variance: One-Way Analysis of Variance, Two-way analysis of Variance.
Probability Plotting for Normal Distribution, Probability Plotting for Type I Extreme Value Distribution.
Identification and Accomodation of Outliers: Hypothesis Tests, Test Statistics for Detection of Outliers,
Dealing with Nonnormal Data.
Estimation of Probabilities of Extreme events when outliers are present. Multivariate Analysis- Principle
Components Analysis, Factor Analysis, Cluster analysis.
Spatial Correlation: The Estimation problem, Spatial Correlation and the Semivariogram, some
Semivariogram Models and Physical Aspects, Spatial Interpolations and Kriging.
[T1,T2] [No. of Hrs. 12]
UNIT – IV
Frequency Analysis of Extreme Events: Order Statistics- Functions of Order Statistics, Expected value and
Variance of Order Statistics, Expected Value and Variance of Order Statistics. Extreme Value Distributions-
Basic Concepts, Gumbel Distribution, Weibull Distribution as an Extreme Value Model, General Extreme
Value Distribution. Analysis of Natural Hazards: Floods, storms and Droughts, Earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions, winds, sea levels and Highest sea waves.
Simulation techniques for Design: MonteCarlo Simulation- Statistical Experiments, Probability Integral
Tranform, Sample size and accuracy of Monte Carlo Experiments.
[T1,T2] [No. of Hrs. 11]
Text Books:
[T1] Kottegoda N.T. and Rosso R., “Probability, Statistics and Reliability for Civil and Environmental
Engineers”, McGraw Hill, USA.
[T2] Azzalini A., Scarpa B., “Data Analysis and Data Mining- An Introduction”, Oxford University Press,
New York.
Reference Books:
[R1] Stokes M.E., Davis C.S., Koch G.G., “Categorical Data Analysis Using the SAS System”, SAS
Publishing, North Carolina.
[R2] Ruppert D., “Statistics and Data Analysis for Financial Engineering”, Springer, New York.