Paper Code: ETCE-415
Paper: Geo-synthetics and Reinforced Soil


UNIT - I
Introduction:
  Historical background of reinforced soil, Principles of reinforced soil through Mohr circle analysis.
Different types of geosynthetics:
  Types of geosynthetics like geotextiles, geogrids, geonets, geocells, geocomposites, their manufacturing methods.
Testing methods for geosynthetics:
  Techniques for testing of different index properties, strength properties, Apparent Opening Size, In-plane and cross-plane permeability tests.
[T1,T2]

UNIT - II
Reinforced Soil retaining walls:
  Different types of walls like wrap-around walls, full-height panel walls, discrete-facing panel walls, modular block walls Design methods as per BS-8006 and FHWA methodsConstruction methods for reinforced soil retaining walls.
Reinforced soil slopes:
  Different slope stability analysis methods like planar wedge method, bilinear wedge method, circular slip methods, Erosion control on slopes using geosynthetics.
[T1]

UNIT - III
Applications in foundations:
  Binquet and Lee's approach for analysis of foundations with reinforcement layers.
Drainage and filtration applications of geosynthetics:
  Different filtration requirements, filtration in different types of soils and criteria for selection of geotextiles.
[T2]

UNIT - IV
Pavement application:
  Geosynthetics for separation and reinforcement in flexible pavements, design by Giroud-Noiray approach, reflection cracking and control using geosynthetics.
Construction of landfills using geosynthetics:
  Different components of modern landfills, collection techniques for leachate, application of different geosynthetics like geonets, geotextiles for drainage in landfills, use ofgeomembranes and Geosynthetic Clay Liner [GCL] as barriers.
[T1,T2]


Text Books:
[T1] Koerner, R.M.
      "Designing with Geosynthetics", 4th edition
        Prentice Hall, New Jersey, USA
[T2] Jewell, R.A.
      "Soil Reinforcement with Geotextiles"
        Special Publication No. 123, CIRIA, Thomas Telford. London, UK, 1996

References
[R1] Geosynthetics - New Horizons, Eds
      G.V. Rao, PK Banerjee, J.T. Shahu, G.V. Ramana
       Asian Books Private Ltd, New Delhi, 2004
[R2] Reinforced Soil Engineering: Advances in Research and Practice
      Hoe I. Ling, Dov Leshchinsky Fumio
       Tatsuoka, 2003
[R3] Design and Practice of Geosynthetic-Reinforced Soil Structures
      Hoe I. Ling, Guido Gottardi Daniele
       Cazzuffi, 2013
[R4] Geosynthetics and Their Applications
      Sanjay Kumar Shukla – 2002
[R5] Geosynthetics Asia 1997: Select papers
      C.V.J. Varma, Venkatappa Rao, G 1998-Rao, G.R.A