Paper Code: ETCE-403
Paper: Irrigation Engineering


UNIT I
Major and medium irrigation schemes of India, Command area development, Types of Soils and their suitability for irrigation, Root Zone soil water, Irrigation requirements, Irrigation water quality, Irrigation canal system, Duty of water, Canal losses, Estimation of design discharge of a canal, canal outlets, Canal regulation, Water logging, causes, effects and remedial measures.
Alluvial channels carrying clear water and Sediment-Laden water, Evaporation and seepage losses in channels, Cross section of irrigation channels, Berms, Freeboard and service road, Silting of channels.
[T1,T2]

UNIT II
Sheet pile cut-off walls, Khosla’s theory and its applications, Correction for Floor Thickness, Correction for Mutual Interference of sheet piles, Correction for the slope of the floor, Method for determination of exit gradient, Uplift force on the floor of canal structure.
Canal regulation structures, Canal Fall, Types of canal fall, Cistern element, Vertical/ Horizontal/Inclined impact Cisterns, No-Impact Cisterns, Roughening measures for energy dissipation such as Friction Block, Ribbed pitching and Provisions such as baffle wall/ deflector/dentated cill etc at the Downstream end of cistern system.
Distributary Head Regulator and Cross Regulator and their Design criteria, Control of Sediment Entry into an offtaking channel.
[T1,R2]

UNIT III
Cross Drainage Structure, their need and types, Head loss through cross drainage structures, Design of Transitions for canal waterway using Hind’s Method, Upiri Method and Vittal & Chiranjeevi’s method, Canal Headworks, Selection of the site, Weir or Barrage, Undersluices, Divide Wall, Fish Ladder, Canal Head Regulator, Sediment Excluders and Sediment Ejector, Settling Basin, River Training for Canal Headworks.
[T2,R2]

UNIT IV
Types of dams, Factors and General Design Criteria for Embankment Dams, Freeboard, Suitability of Foundation, Slope protection, Factors and General Design Criteria for Gravity Dams, Forces on gravity Dam, Causes of failure of a gravity Dam, Stability Analysis of Gravity Dams, Galleries and outlets.
Main components of Spillway, Types of spillways, energy dissipaters, Cavitation erosion on spillway surface, Classification/behaviour of rivers, Cutoffs, Aggradation and Degradation, River Training and its objectives, River training Methods such as Levees, Spurs, Guide Banks, Design of Guide Bank and Bank Protection.
[T1,T2]


Text Books:
[T1] G.L. Asawa
      Irrigation and Water Resources Engineering
       New Age Internal Publishers, New Delhi
[T2] S.K. Garg
      Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic Structures
       Khanna Publishers, Delhi

References Books:
[R1] Ralph A. Wurbs, Wisley P. James- Water Resources Engineering, PHI, New Delhi
[R2] R.K. Sharma and T.K. Sharma
      Irrigation Engineering
       S.Chand and Company Ltd, New Delhi
[R3] Satya Narayana Murty Challa
      Water Resources Engineering [Principles and Practice]
       NewAge Intl
[R5] Ven T Chow, David R Maidment, Larry W Mays
      Applied Hydrology
       McGraw-Hill, New Delhi
[R6] Bharat Singh
      Fundamentals of Irrigation Engineering
       Nem Chand and Brothers, Roorkee