Paper Code: ETHS-351
Paper: Communication Skills for Professionals Lab


Lab Activities to be conducted:


1. Listening and Comprehension Activities –-
   Listening to selected lectures, seminars, news (BBC, CNN, etc.).
   Writing a brief summary or answering questions on the material listened to.

2. Reading Activities --
   Reading different types of texts for different purposes with focus on the sound structure and intonation patterns of English.
   Emphasis on correct pronunciation.

3. Conversation Activities --
   Effective Conversation Skills.
   Formal/Informal Conversation.
   Addressing higher officials, colleagues, subordinates, a public gathering.
   Participating in a video conference.

4. Making an Oral Presentation –-
   Planning and preparing a model presentation.
   Organizing the presentation to suit the audience and context.
   Connecting with the audience during presentation.
   Projecting a positive image while speaking.
   Emphasis on effective body language.

5. Making a Power Point Presentation --
   Structure and format
   Covering elements of an effective presentation.
   Body language dynamics.

6. Making a Speech --
   Basics of public speaking; Preparing for a speech; Features of a good speech; Speaking with a microphone.
   Famous speeches may be played as model speeches for learning the art of public speaking.
   Some suggested speeches:
     Barack Obama, John F Kennedy, Nelson Mandela, Mahatma Gandhi, Jawahar Lal Nehru, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Subhash Chandra Bose, Winston Churchill, Martin Luther King Jr.

7. Participating in a Group Discussion --
   Structure and dynamics of a GD.
   Techniques of effective participation in group discussion.
   Preparing for group discussion.
   Accepting others’ views/ideas.
   Arguing against others’ views or ideas, etc.

8. Participating in Mock Interviews -- Job Interviews:
   Purpose and process; How to prepare for an interview.
   Language and style to be used in an interview; Types of interview questions and how to answer them.


Suggested Lab Activities:
1. Interview through telephone/video-conferencing
2. Extempore, Story Telling, Poetry Recitation
3. Mock Situations and Role Play; Enacting a short skit
4. Debate (Developing an Argument), News Reading and Anchoring


Reference Books:
1. Patnaik, Priyadarshi
    Group Discussion and Interview Skills: With VCD
     Cambridge University Press India (Foundation Books), 2012 edition
2. Kaul, Asha
    Business Communication
     PHI Learning: 2009
3. Hartman and Lemay
    Presentation Success: A Step-by-Step Approach
     Thomson Learning, 2000
